The Sphere Project

Humanitarian 
Charter and 
Minimum Standards 
in Humanitarian 
Response

2011 ediTion

The Sphere Project

Humanitarian  
Charter and  
Minimum Standards  
in Humanitarian  
Response

Published by:

The Sphere Project
Copyright@The Sphere Project 2011

Email: info@sphereproject.org
Website : www.sphereproject.org

The Sphere Project was initiated in 1997 by a group of NGOs and the Red Cross 
and Red Crescent Movement to develop a set of universal minimum standards 
in  core  areas  of  humanitarian  response:  the  Sphere  Handbook.  The  aim  of 
the  Handbook  is  to  improve  the  quality  of  humanitarian  response  in  situations 
of disaster and con(cid:197)ict, and to enhance the accountability of the humanitarian 
system  to  disaster-affected  people.  The  Humanitarian  Charter  and  Minimum 
Standards in Humanitarian Response are the product of the collective experience 
of many people and agencies. They should therefore not be seen as representing 
the views of any one agency.

First trial edition 1998
First (cid:196)nal edition (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)
Second edition 2004
Third edition 2011 
Third reprint, (cid:49)uly (cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:26)

ISBN 978-1-908176-00-4

A catalogue record for this publication is available from The British Library and the 
US Library of Congress.

All  rights  reserved.  This  material  is  copyright  but  may  be  reproduced  by  any 
method without fee for educational purposes but not for resale. Formal permission 
is required for all such uses but normally will be granted immediately. For copying 
in other circumstances, for posting online or for reuse in other publications, or 
for translation or adaptation, prior written permission must be obtained from the 
copyright owner, and a fee may be payable.

Distributed for the Sphere Project by Practical Action Publishing and its agents 
and representatives throughout the world.

Practical (cid:40)ction Publishing, Schumacher Centre for Technology and (cid:43)evelopment, 
(cid:41)ourton on (cid:43)unsmore, Rugby, C(cid:61)(cid:25)(cid:26) 9(cid:56)(cid:65), (cid:60)nited (cid:50)ingdom
Tel (cid:18)(cid:27)(cid:27) (cid:15)(cid:23)(cid:16) 19(cid:25)(cid:29) (cid:29)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:23)1; Fax (cid:18)(cid:27)(cid:27) (cid:15)(cid:23)(cid:16)19(cid:25)(cid:29) (cid:29)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:25)
Email: sphere@practicalaction.org.uk 
Website: www.practicalactionpublishing.org/sphere

Practical (cid:40)ction Publishing (cid:15)(cid:60)(cid:50) Company Reg. No. 11(cid:28)9(cid:23)1(cid:31)(cid:16) is the wholly owned 
publishing company of Practical Action and trades only in support of its parent 
charity objectives.

Designed by: 

, Met(cid:97)-Tessy, France

Printed by: Hobbs the Printers, Hampshire, (cid:60)nited (cid:50)ingdom.

ii

Foreword

This latest edition of the Sphere Handbook, Humanitarian Charter and Minimum 
Standards  in  Humanitarian  Response,  is  the  product  of  broad  inter-agency 
collaboration.

The  Humanitarian  Charter  and  minimum  standards  re(cid:197)ect  the  determina-
tion of agencies to improve both the effectiveness of their assistance and their 
accountability  to  their  stakeholders,  contributing  to  a  practical  framework  for 
accountability.

The Humanitarian Charter and minimum standards will not of course stop human-
itarian crises from happening, nor can they prevent human suffering. What they 
offer, however, is an opportunity for the enhancement of assistance with the aim 
of making a difference to the lives of people affected by disaster.

From  their  origin  in  the  late  199(cid:23)s,  as  an  initiative  of  a  group  of  humanitarian 
NGOs and the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, the Sphere standards 
are now applied as the de facto standards in humanitarian response in the 21st 
century.

(cid:40) word of gratitude must, therefore, be given to all those who have made this 
happen.

 

 
 

 

Ton van (cid:65)utphen 
Sphere Board Chair 

 (cid:49)ohn (cid:43)amerell
Project Manager

iii

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Acknowledgements

The revision of the Sphere Handbook has been an extensive, collaborative and 
consultative  process,  engaging  a  considerable  number  of  people  around  the 
world – too many to mention individually by name. The Sphere Project acknowl-
edges the breadth of the contributions made and the willingness of organisations 
and individuals to be involved.

The Handbook revision process was led by a group of focal points for the technical 
chapters and cross-cutting themes, supported by resource persons for emerging 
issues, all drawn from the sector, either seconded from humanitarian organisa-
tions  or  directly  hired,  depending  on  the  level  of  work  envisaged.  Consultants 
led the revision of elements relevant for the Handbook as a whole, and which 
re(cid:88)uired  substantial  new  work.  Where  not  stated  otherwise,  the  people  listed 
below were consultants.

Humanitarian  Charter:  (cid:49)ames  (cid:43)arcy,  Mary  Picard,  (cid:49)im  (cid:41)ishop  (cid:15)Inter(cid:40)ction(cid:16), 
Clare Smith (cid:15)C(cid:40)RE International(cid:16) and (cid:64)vonne (cid:50)lynman (cid:15)IFRC(cid:16)

Protection Principles: Ed Schenkenberg van Mierop (cid:15)IC(cid:61)(cid:40)(cid:16) and Claudine Haenni 
Dale

Core Standards: Peta Sandison and Sara Davidson

Technical chapters
 » Water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion: Nega Bazezew Legesse 

(Oxfam GB)

 »

Food security and nutrition:

 - Nutrition: Susan Thurstans (cid:15)Save the Children (cid:60)(cid:50)(cid:16)
 - Food security and livelihoods: (cid:43)evrig (cid:61)elly (cid:15)(cid:40)ction contre la Faim(cid:16)
 - Food  aid:  Paul  Turnbull  (cid:15)WFP(cid:16)  and  Walter  Middleton  (cid:15)World  (cid:61)ision 

International)

 »

Shelter, settlement and non-food items: Graham Saunders (IFRC)

 » Health action: Mes(cid:196)n Teklu (cid:15)World (cid:61)ision International(cid:16)

iv

A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s

Cross-cutting themes
 » Children:  Monica  Blomström  and  Mari  Mörth  (both  Save  the  Children 

Sweden)

 » Older people: (cid:49)o Wells (cid:15)Help(cid:40)ge International(cid:16)

 »

Persons  with  disabilities:  Maria  (cid:50)ett  (cid:15)Leonard  Cheshire  (cid:43)isability  and 
Inclusive Development Centre)

 » Gender: Siobhán Foran (IASC GenCap Project)

 »

Psychosocial  issues:  Mark  van  Ommeren  (WHO)  and  Mike  Wessells 
(Columbia University)

 » HIV and AIDS: Paul Spiegel (UNHCR)

 »

Environment,  climate  change  and  disaster  risk  reduction:  Anita  van 
Breda (WWF) and Nigel Timmins (Christian Aid)

Sphere companion standards
 »

Education: (cid:49)ennifer Hofmann and T(cid:97)vetomira Laub (cid:15)both INEE(cid:16)

 »

 »

Livestock: Cathy Watson (LEGS)

Economic recovery: Tracy Gerstle and Laura Meissner (both SEEP network)

Resource persons
 »

Early recovery: Maria Olga Gonzalez (UNDP-BCPR)

 » Camp coordination and camp management: Gillian Dunn (IRC)

 » Cash  transfer  programming:  Nupur  (cid:50)ukrety  (cid:15)Cash  Learning  Partnership 

network)

In addition, a number of people were consulted with regard to the civil(cid:182)military 
interface, con(cid:197)ict sensitivity and urban settings.

Working groups and reference groups were established to support the focal 
points in their work; while The Sphere Project acknowledges the contribution of 
all these persons, their individual names are not included herein. However, a full 
listing of all working group and reference group members can be found on the 
Sphere website: www.sphereproject.org.

Editors: Phil Greaney, Sue P(cid:196)ffner, (cid:43)avid Wilson

Revision workshop facilitator: Raja (cid:49)arrah

Monitoring and evaluation specialist: Claudia Schneider, S(cid:50)(cid:40)T

v

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Sphere Board (as at 31 December 2010)
(cid:40)ction by Churches Together (cid:15)(cid:40)CT(cid:16) (cid:40)lliance (cid:15)(cid:49)ohn Nduna(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:40)gency Coordinating 
(cid:41)ody  for  (cid:40)fghan  Relief  (cid:15)(cid:40)C(cid:41)(cid:40)R(cid:16)  (cid:15)Laurent  Saillard(cid:16)  (cid:17)  (cid:40)ktion  (cid:43)eutschland  Hilft 
(cid:15)(cid:40)(cid:43)H(cid:16) (cid:15)Manuela Rossbach(cid:16) (cid:17) C(cid:40)RE International (cid:15)Olivier (cid:41)raunsteffer(cid:16) (cid:17) C(cid:40)RIT(cid:40)S 
Internationalis  (cid:15)(cid:49)an  Weuts(cid:16)  (cid:17)  The  International  Council  of  (cid:61)oluntary  (cid:40)gencies 
(cid:15)IC(cid:61)(cid:40)(cid:16)  (cid:15)Ed  Schenkenberg  van  Mierop(cid:16)  (cid:17)  International  Rescue  Committee  (cid:15)IRC(cid:16) 
(cid:15)Gillian  (cid:43)unn(cid:16)  (cid:17)  Inter(cid:40)ction  (cid:15)Linda  Poteat(cid:16)  (cid:17)  Interm(cid:125)n  Oxfam  (cid:15)Elena  Sgorbati(cid:16)  (cid:17) 
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) (Simon 
Eccleshall(cid:16)  (cid:17)  The  Lutheran  World  Federation  (cid:15)LWF(cid:16)  (cid:15)Rudelmar  (cid:41)ueno  de  Faria(cid:16) 
(cid:17)  Policy  (cid:40)ction  Group  on  Emergency  Response  (cid:15)P(cid:40)GER(cid:16)  (cid:15)Mia  (cid:61)ukojevic(cid:16)  (cid:17) 
Plan  International  (cid:15)(cid:60)nni  (cid:50)rishnan(cid:16)  (cid:17)  Save  the  Children  (cid:40)lliance  (cid:15)(cid:40)nnie  Foster(cid:16)  (cid:17) 
Sphere India (cid:15)N.M. Prusty(cid:16) (cid:17) The Salvation (cid:40)rmy (cid:15)Raelton Gibbs(cid:16) (cid:17) World (cid:61)ision 
International (cid:15)Ton van (cid:65)utphen(cid:16)

Donors
In addition to contributions by the (cid:41)oard organisations listed above, funding for 
the Handbook revision process was provided by:

(cid:40)ustralian (cid:40)gency for International (cid:43)evelopment (cid:15)(cid:40)us(cid:40)I(cid:43)(cid:16) (cid:17) European Community 
Humanitarian  Of(cid:196)ce  (cid:15)ECHO(cid:16)  (cid:17)  German  Ministry  of  Foreign  (cid:40)ffairs  (cid:17)  Spanish 
Ministry  of  Foreign  (cid:40)ffairs  (cid:17)  Swiss  (cid:40)gency  for  (cid:43)evelopment  and  Cooperation 
(cid:15)S(cid:43)C(cid:16)  (cid:17)  (cid:60)nited  (cid:50)ingdom  (cid:43)epartment  for  International  (cid:43)evelopment  (cid:15)(cid:43)FI(cid:43)(cid:16)  (cid:17) 
(cid:60)nited States (cid:43)epartment of State (cid:41)ureau of Refugees and Migration (cid:15)(cid:60)S-PRM(cid:16)  (cid:17) 
(cid:60)nited  States  (cid:40)gency  for  International  (cid:43)evelopment  Of(cid:196)ce  of  Foreign  (cid:43)isaster 
Assistance (US-OFDA)

Sphere Project staff team
Project Manager: (cid:49)ohn (cid:43)amerell
Training and Learning Management: (cid:61)er(cid:125)nica Foubert
Promotion and Materials Management: Aninia Nadig
Training and Promotion Support: Cécilia Furtade
Administration and Finance: Lydia Beauquis

(cid:40)t various stages during the Handbook revision process, additional team support 
was provided by (cid:40)lison (cid:49)oyner, Hani Eskandar and Laura Lope(cid:97).

vi

Contents

Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  iii

Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  iv

What is Sphere?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3

The Humanitarian Charter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

Protection Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

The Core Standards  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

Minimum Standards in Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion . . . . . . . 79

Minimum Standards in Food Security and Nutrition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139

Minimum Standards in Shelter, Settlement and Non-Food Items . . . . . . . . . . . . . .239

Minimum Standards in Health Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287

Annexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .355

Annex 1.  Key Documents that inform the Humanitarian Charter . . . . . . . . . . . .356

Annex 2.  The Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and  

Red Crescent Movement and Non-Governmental Organisations 
(NGOs) in Disaster Relief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .368

Annex 3.  Abbreviations and Acronyms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .377

Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .381

1

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The Handbook

What is Sphere?

Humanitarian Charter

Protection Principles

Principles and 
Core Standards

Core Standards 

Water Supply, Sanitation  
and Hygiene Promotion

Food Security and Nutrition

Shelter, Settlement  
and Non-Food Items

Health Action

Key Documents that inform 
the Humanitarian Charter

Code of Conduct

Each chapter contains 
a set of standards, as 
well as appendices 

and references/
further reading. 

Standard structure:
Minimum standard

Key actions

Key indicators
Guidance notes

The Core 
Standards  
and minimum 

standards: 
Principles  
put into  
practice

2

What is Sphere? 

3

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

What is Sphere?

The  Sphere  Project  and  its  Handbook  are  well  known  for  introducing  consid-
erations  of  quality  and  accountability  to  humanitarian  response.  But  what  are 
the origins of the Sphere Project? What are its philosophy and approach? How 
and  why  was  this  Handbook  conceived?  What  is  its  place  in  the  wider  realm 
of humanitarian action? And who should use it and when? This chapter strives 
to  provide  some  answers  to  these  key  (cid:88)uestions.  Furthermore,  it  details  the 
Handbook structure and explains how to use it and how you or your organisation 
can conform to the Sphere minimum standards.

The Sphere Project philosophy: The right to life  
with dignity

The Sphere Project – or ‘Sphere’ – was initiated in 1997 by a group of humani-
tarian non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and the International Red Cross 
and Red Crescent Movement. Their aim was to improve the quality of their actions 
during  disaster  response  and  to  be  held  accountable  for  them.  They  based 
Sphere’s philosophy on two core beliefs: (cid:196)rst, that those affected by disaster 
or con(cid:197)ict have a right to life with dignity and, therefore, a right to assistance; 
and second, that all possible steps should be taken to alleviate human suffering 
arising out of disaster or con(cid:197)ict.

Striving  to  support  these  two  core  beliefs,  the  Sphere  Project  framed  a 
Humanitarian  Charter  and  identi(cid:196)ed  a  set  of  minimum  standards  in  key  life-
saving sectors which are now re(cid:197)ected in the Handbook(cid:187)s four technical chapters: 
water  supply,  sanitation  and  hygiene  promotion;  food  security  and  nutrition; 
shelter, settlement and non-food items; and health action. The Core Standards 
are process standards and apply to all technical chapters.

The  minimum  standards  are  evidence-based  and  represent  sector-wide 
consensus  on  best  practice  in  humanitarian  response.  (cid:50)ey  actions,  key 
indicators  and  guidance  notes  (described  in  the  ‘How  to  use  the  standards’ 
section below(cid:16) accompany each standard, providing guidance on how to attain 
the standard.

4

W h a t   i s   S p h e r e ?

The  minimum  standards  describe  conditions  that  must  be  achieved  in  any 
humanitarian response in order for disaster-affected populations to survive and 
recover in stable conditions and with dignity. The inclusion of affected popula-
tions in the consultative process lies at the heart of Sphere’s philosophy. The 
Sphere Project, conse(cid:88)uently, was one of the (cid:196)rst of what are now known as the 
quality and accountability (cid:15)(cid:56)(cid:13)(cid:40)(cid:16) initiatives.

The Humanitarian Charter and the minimum standards are published together 
as  a  Handbook,  the  latest  edition  of  which  you  are  reading  now.  The  Sphere 
Handbook is designed for planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation 
during humanitarian response. It is also an effective advocacy tool when nego-
tiating  for  humanitarian  space  and  for  the  provision  of  resources  with  authori-
ties. Furthermore, it is useful for disaster preparedness activities and contingency 
planning,  with  donors  increasingly  including  the  standards  in  their  reporting 
requirements.

(cid:41)ecause it is not owned by any one organisation, the Handbook enjoys broad 
acceptance by the humanitarian sector as a whole. It has become one of the most 
widely known and internationally recognised sets of standards for humanitarian 
response and is used as an inter-agency communication and coordination tool.

First published in (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23), the Handbook was revised in (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26) and again in (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:182)
(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23). (cid:43)uring each revision process, sector-wide consultations were conducted, 
involving  a  wide  range  of  agencies,  organisations  and  individuals,  including 
governments and United Nations (UN) agencies.

The  principal  users  of  the  Sphere  Handbook  are  practitioners  involved  in 
planning, managing or implementing a humanitarian response. This includes staff 
and volunteers of local, national and international humanitarian agencies. In the 
context of fund-raising and project proposals, the minimum standards are also 
frequently referred to.

Other actors, such as government and local authorities, the military or the private 
sector, are also encouraged to use the Sphere Handbook. It may be useful in 
guiding their own actions, but also in helping them to understand the standards 
used by the humanitarian agencies with whom they may interact.

The Handbook: A reﬂection of Sphere’s values

The  Handbook  structure  re(cid:197)ects  Sphere(cid:187)s  aim  to  (cid:196)rmly  anchor  humanitarian 
response in a rights-based and participatory approach.

5

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Humanitarian Charter, Protection Principles and Core Standards
The  Humanitarian  Charter,  the  Protection  Principles  and  the  Core  Standards 
articulate Sphere’s rights-based and people-centred approach to humanitarian 
response.  They  focus  on  the  importance  of  including  the  affected  population 
and local and national authorities at all stages of the response. The Protection 
Principles  and  Core  Standards  are  grouped  together  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Handbook so as to avoid repeating them in each technical chapter. Sphere users, 
including specialists in one particular technical area, must consider them as an 
integral part of these chapters.

The cornerstone of the Handbook is the Humanitarian Charter (accompanied 
by a descriptive list of key legal and policy documents in (cid:40)nnex 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:16). 
It provides the ethical and legal backdrop to the Protection Principles, as well as 
to  the  Core  Standards  and  minimum  standards,  thereby  setting  the  stage  for 
their  correct  interpretation  and  implementation.  It  is  a  statement  of  established 
legal rights and obligations and of shared beliefs and commitments of humani-
tarian agencies, all collected in a set of common principles, rights and duties. 
Founded  on  the  principle  of  humanity  and  the  humanitarian  imperative,  these 
include the right to life with dignity, the right to receive humanitarian assistance and 
the right to protection and security. The Charter also emphasises the importance 
of  agency  accountability  to  affected  communities.  The  Core  Standards  and 
minimum standards are an articulation of what these principles and obligations 
mean in practice.

The  Humanitarian  Charter  explains  why  both  assistance  and  protection  are 
critical pillars of humanitarian action. To further develop this protection aspect, 
the Handbook includes a set of Protection Principles, which translates several 
of  the  legal  principles  and  rights  outlined  in  the  Charter  into  strategies  and 
actions that should inform humanitarian practice from a protection perspective. 
Protection  is  a  core  part  of  humanitarian  action  and  the  Protection  Principles 
point to the responsibility of all humanitarian agencies to ensure that their activi-
ties are concerned with the more severe threats that affected people commonly 
face in times of con(cid:197)ict or disaster.

All humanitarian agencies should ensure that their actions do not bring further 
harm  to  affected  people  (cid:15)Protection  Principle  1(cid:16),  that  their  activities  bene(cid:196)t  in 
particular those who are most affected and vulnerable (cid:15)Protection Principle (cid:25)(cid:16), 
that they contribute to protecting affected people from violence and other human 
rights abuses (cid:15)Protection Principle (cid:26)(cid:16) and that they help affected people recover 
from  abuses  (Protection  Principle  4).  The  roles  and  responsibilities  of  humani-
tarian agencies in protection are, generally, secondary to the legal responsibility 
of the state or other relevant authorities. Protection often involves reminding these 
authorities of their responsibilities.

6

W h a t   i s   S p h e r e ?

The Core Standards are the (cid:196)rst set of minimum standards and inform all others. 
They describe how the processes and approaches taken during a humanitarian 
response are fundamental to an effective response. A focus on the capacity and 
active  participation  of  those  affected  by  disaster  or  con(cid:197)ict,  a  comprehensive 
analysis and understanding of needs and context, effective coordination among 
agencies, a commitment to continually improving performance, and appropriately 
skilled and supported aid workers are all essential in order to attain the technical 
standards.

The Protection Principles and Core Standards are grouped together at the begin-
ning of the Handbook so as to avoid repeating them in each technical chapter. 
They underpin all humanitarian activity and must be used in conjunction with 
the technical chapters. They are critical to achieving the technical standards in 
a spirit of quality and accountability to the affected populations.

The Core Standards and the minimum standards in four technical chapters
The  Core  Standards  and  minimum  standards  cover  approaches  to  program-
ming and four sets of life-saving activities: water supply, sanitation and hygiene 
promotion; food security and nutrition; shelter, settlement and non-food items; 
and health action.

How to use the standards
The Core Standards and minimum standards follow a speci(cid:196)c format. They begin 
with a general and universal statement – the minimum standard – followed by a 
series of key actions, key indicators and guidance notes.

First, the minimum standard is stated. Each standard is derived from the prin-
ciple that disaster-affected populations have the right to life with dignity. They are 
qualitative in nature and specify the minimum levels to be attained in humanitarian 
response. Their scope is universal and applicable in any disaster situation. They 
are, therefore, formulated in general terms.

Next,  practical  key  actions  are  suggested,  to  attain  the  minimum  standard. 
Some actions may not be applicable in all contexts, and it is up to the practitioner 
to select the relevant actions and devise alternative actions that will result in the 
standard being met.

Then, a set of key indicators serves as ‘signals’ that show whether a standard 
has  been  attained.  They  provide  a  way  of  measuring  and  communicating  the 
processes and results of key actions. The key indicators relate to the minimum 
standard, not to the key action.

7

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Finally, guidance notes include context-speci(cid:196)c points to consider when aiming 
at reaching the key actions and key indicators. They provide guidance on tackling 
practical dif(cid:196)culties, benchmarks or advice on priority and cross-cutting themes. 
They may also include critical issues relating to the standards, actions or indica-
tors and describe dilemmas, controversies or gaps in current knowledge. They 
do not provide guidance as to how to implement a speci(cid:196)c activity.

Brief  introductions  to  each  chapter  set  out  the  major  relevant  issues.  The 
technical  minimum  standards  chapters  further  contain  appendices  including, 
for  example,  assessment  checklists,  formulas,  tables  and  examples  of  report 
forms. Each chapter ends with references and suggestions for further reading. A 
detailed glossary for each of the Handbook chapters is available on the Sphere 
website (www.sphereproject.org).

All the chapters are interconnected. Fre(cid:88)uently, standards described in one 
sector need to be addressed in conjunction with standards described in others. 
(cid:40)s a result, the Handbook contains numerous cross-references.

Conforming with the Sphere minimum standards
The Sphere Handbook is a voluntary code and a self-regulatory tool for quality 
and  accountability,  and  the  Sphere  Project  does  not  operate  any  compliance 
mechanism. There is no such thing as (cid:186)signing up(cid:187) to Sphere, a Sphere member-
ship or any process of accreditation. The Sphere Project has consciously opted 
for  the  Handbook  not  to  be  prescriptive  or  compliance-oriented,  in  order  to 
encourage the broadest possible ownership of the Handbook.

The  Handbook  does  not  offer  practical  guidance  on  how  to  provide  certain 
services (the key actions suggest activities to reach a standard without specifying 
how to do that(cid:16). Rather, it explains what needs to be in place in order to ensure a 
life with dignity for the affected population. It is, therefore, up to each implementing 
agency to choose a system to ensure conformance with the Sphere minimum 
standards. Some agencies have used purely internal mechanisms, while others 
have opted for peer review. Some agency networks have used Sphere to evaluate 
their collective response in particular emergencies.

Conforming with Sphere does not mean meeting all the standards and indi-
cators.  The  degree  to  which  agencies  can  meet  standards  will  depend  on  a 
range of factors, some of which are outside their control. Sometimes dif(cid:196)culties 
of access to the affected population, lack of cooperation from the authorities or 
severe insecurity make standards impossible to meet.

8

W h a t   i s   S p h e r e ?

If the general living conditions of an affected population were already signi(cid:196)cantly 
below the minimum standards before the disaster, agencies may have insuf(cid:196)cient 
resources to meet the standards. In such situations, providing basic facilities for 
the entire affected population may be more important than reaching the minimum 
standards for only a proportion.

Sometimes  the  minimum  standards  may  exceed  everyday  living  conditions  for 
the  surrounding  population.  Adhering  to  the  standards  for  disaster-affected 
populations remains essential. But such situations may also indicate the need for 
action in support of the surrounding population and for dialogue with community 
leaders. What is appropriate and feasible will depend on the context.

In cases where the standards cannot be met, humanitarian agencies should:

 - describe  in  their  reports  (cid:15)assessment,  evaluation,  etc.(cid:16)  the  gap  between 

the relevant Sphere indicators and the ones reached in practice

 - explain the reasons for this and what needs to be changed
 - assess the negative implications for the affected population
 - take appropriate mitigating actions to minimise the harm caused by these 

implications.

(cid:41)y committing to the above steps, agencies demonstrate that they are conforming 
with Sphere’s philosophy and its minimum standards even if they are unable to 
meet them as set out in the Handbook.

The place of Sphere within humanitarian action

The  Sphere  Handbook  is  designed  for  use  during  humanitarian  response  in  a 
range  of  situations  including  natural  disasters,  con(cid:197)ict,  slow-  and  rapid-onset 
events, rural and urban environments, and complex political emergencies in all 
countries. The term (cid:186)disaster(cid:187) encompasses these situations, and where appro-
priate,  the  term  (cid:186)con(cid:197)ict(cid:187)  is  used.  (cid:186)Population(cid:187)  refers  to  individuals,  families, 
communities  and  broader  groups.  Conse(cid:88)uently,  we  commonly  use  (cid:186)disaster-
affected population’ throughout the Handbook.

When to use this Handbook
Focusing on the period of humanitarian response, the Sphere minimum stan-
dards cover activities which meet the urgent survival needs of disaster-affected 
populations. This phase can range from a few days or weeks to many months and 
even years, particularly in contexts involving protracted insecurity and displace-
ment. It is, therefore, impossible to assign a particular timeframe to the usefulness 
of the Sphere standards.

9

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The Handbook does, however, have a speci(cid:196)c place within the broader realm of 
humanitarian action, which goes beyond providing immediate relief and covers 
a  spectrum  of  activities  that  starts  with  disaster  preparedness,  then  includes 
humanitarian  response,  and  (cid:196)nally  extends  into  early  recovery.  (cid:40)s  a  reference 
tool,  the  Handbook  is  useful  in  both  the  disaster  preparedness  and  the  early 
recovery phases which conceptually ‘frame’ humanitarian response but in reality 
need to be considered simultaneously.

Disaster  preparedness  re(cid:88)uires  that  actors  (cid:182)  governments,  humanitarian 
agencies, local civil society organisations, communities and individuals (cid:182) have the 
capacities, relationships and knowledge to prepare for and respond effectively to 
disaster or con(cid:197)ict. (cid:41)efore and during a response, they should start taking actions 
that  will  improve  preparedness  and  reduce  risk  for  the  future.  They  should  be 
prepared, at least, to meet the Sphere minimum standards during a future disaster.

Early recovery is the process following relief and leading into long-term recovery 
and is most effective if anticipated and facilitated from the very outset of a human-
itarian response. Recognising the importance of early recovery, the Handbook 
makes reference to it throughout and as appropriate.

Developments in the humanitarian sector and their implications for Sphere
A number of developments in the humanitarian sector and other relevant areas 
have  arisen  over  the  past  few  years,  encompassing  changes  in  the  nature  of 
disasters  and  con(cid:197)icts,  as  well  as  of  humanitarian  work.  The  developments 
considered during the Handbook revision process include:

 - a  growing  conceptual  and  operational  focus  on  local  and  national 
responses  with  the  awareness  that  affected  populations  must  be 
consulted  and  the  response  capacities  of  the  crisis-affected  state  and 
national agencies and institutions must be reinforced

 - more  proactive  accountability  of  humanitarian  action,  in  particular 
accountability to affected populations, but also more proactive coordina-
tion, including within the humanitarian reform process (cid:15)cluster approach(cid:16), 
under the auspices of the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC)

 - an increased focus on protection issues and responses
 - increasing  awareness  of  potentially  large-scale  forced  migration  due  to 
climate change-induced disasters and an awareness that environmental 
degradation increases vulnerability

 - the  recognition  that  poor  urban  populations  are  growing  rapidly  and 
that  they  have  speci(cid:196)c  vulnerabilities,  in  particular  related  to  the  money 
economy, social cohesion and physical space

10

W h a t   i s   S p h e r e ?

 - new approaches to aid, such as cash and voucher transfers and local 

purchases replacing in-kind shipments of humanitarian assistance

 - an increased recognition of disaster risk reduction as both a sector and 

an approach

 - an increased involvement of the military in humanitarian response, a set 
of actors not primarily driven by the humanitarian imperative, re(cid:88)uiring the 
development of speci(cid:196)c guidelines and coordination strategies for humani-
tarian civil–military dialogue

 - an increased involvement of the private sector in humanitarian response 

requiring similar guidelines and strategies as the civil–military dialogue.

The  Sphere  Project  includes  these  developments  in  the  Handbook  as  appro-
priate – in particular the emerging issues of cash transfers, early recovery and 
civil–military relations.

Understanding the context during humanitarian response
Effective  humanitarian  response  must  be  based  on  a  comprehensive,  contex-
tualised diagnosis (cid:15)assessment, monitoring and evaluation(cid:16), in order to analyse 
people’s needs, vulnerabilities and capacities in each context.

The Handbook is essentially designed as a tool to recognise different contexts 
and to adapt response programmes accordingly: it guides practitioners in their 
re(cid:197)ections around reaching a universally applicable standard in a concrete situ-
ation or context, with particular focus on speci(cid:196)c vulnerabilities and capacities.

Not  all  individuals  within  a  disaster-affected  population  have  equal  control  of 
resources and power. People are, therefore, impacted differently on the basis of 
their ethnic origin, religious or political af(cid:196)liation. (cid:43)isplacement may make vulner-
able certain people who in normal situations would not have been at risk. Women, 
children, older people, persons with disabilities or people living with HI(cid:61) may be 
denied vital assistance or the opportunity to be heard due to physical, cultural 
and/or social barriers. Experience has shown that treating these people as a long 
list of (cid:186)vulnerable groups(cid:187) can lead to fragmented and ineffective interventions, 
which ignore overlapping vulnerabilities and the changing nature of vulnerabilities 
over time, even during one speci(cid:196)c crisis.

Relief and recovery efforts must also consider future hazards and vulnerabilities 
in order to build communities back safer and promote stronger resilience. In many 
parts  of  the  world,  climate  change  is  already  beginning  to  have  an  impact  on 
patterns of risk; traditional knowledge of ha(cid:97)ards, vulnerabilities and capacities 
needs to be combined with assessments of future climate risks.

11

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

In order to do justice to each unique disaster situation and the particular vulner-
abilities  and  capabilities  of  the  affected  population,  the  Handbook  addresses 
a number of cross-cutting themes. The themes relating to children, gender, 
older  people,  HIV  and  AIDS,  persons  with  disabilities,  and  psychosocial 
support deal with individual and subgroup vulnerabilities. Disaster risk reduc-
tion (including climate change) and environment address vulnerability issues 
affecting  the  entire  affected  population.  (cid:40)t  the  end  of  this  introduction,  each 
theme is described in more detail.

Links with other humanitarian standards
In  order  to  maintain  the  Sphere  Handbook  as  a  single  volume  of  manageable 
si(cid:97)e, the focus remains on the four primary sectors of humanitarian response. 
Many related sectors which are part of an effective humanitarian response have 
developed  their  own  standards.  A  number  of  them  are  included  in  a  series  of 
Sphere  companion  standards,  published  as  separate  volumes  but  devel-
oped  with  the  same  rigor  and  process  of  consultation  as  Sphere  –  the  Inter-
Agency  Network  for  Education  in  Emergencies  (INEE)  Minimum  Standards  for 
Education: Preparedness, Response, Recovery; the Small Enterprise Education 
and  Promotion  (SEEP)  Network’s  Minimum  Standards  for  Economic  Recovery 
after Crisis; and the Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards (cid:15)LEGS(cid:16).

Education in emergencies can be both life-sustaining and life-saving. Provided in 
safe spaces, it offers a sense of normalcy, psychosocial support and protection 
against  exploitation  and  harm.  It  can  also  be  used  to  communicate  messages 
about safety, life skills and vital health and hygiene information. The INEE Minimum 
Standards for Education: Preparedness, Response, Recovery were (cid:196)rst published 
in  (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)  and  updated  in  (cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23),  becoming  companion  standards  to  Sphere  in 
2008.  They  present  a  framework  to  ensure  critical  linkages  between  education 
and health, water, sanitation and hygiene, nutrition, shelter and protection and to 
enhance the safety, (cid:88)uality and accountability of educational preparedness and 
response.

Small enterprise development and livestock are covered by the SEEP Network's 
Minimum  Standards  for  Economic  Recovery  after  Crisis  and  the  Livestock 
Emergency Guidelines and Standards respectively. It is anticipated that these two 
sets of minimum standards will become Sphere companion standards in 2011.

(cid:60)sed  together  with  this  Handbook,  the  companion  standards  will  improve  the 
(cid:88)uality of assistance provided to people affected by disaster or con(cid:197)ict. Relevant 
guidance from the INEE, SEEP and LEGS standards has been integrated and is 
cross-referenced throughout this Handbook.

12

W h a t   i s   S p h e r e ?

(cid:40)gencies, coalitions and networks have established other standards and codes 
to meet particular operational needs, such as speci(cid:196)c agencies(cid:187) mandates, tech-
nical expertise or a perceived gap in guidance. Where relevant, these other stan-
dards are referenced in the technical chapters of this Handbook.

The  Sphere  Project  is  part  of  a  group  of  quality  and  accountability  initia-
tives within the sector, having a close working relationship with the Emergency 
Capacity (cid:41)uilding (cid:15)EC(cid:41)(cid:16) Project, which has developed the Good Enough Guide, 
and the Humanitarian (cid:40)ccountability Partnership (cid:15)H(cid:40)P(cid:16), which deals with compli-
ance  issues  through  its  Humanitarian  (cid:40)ccountability  and  (cid:56)uality  Management 
Standard. Other (cid:56)(cid:13)(cid:40) initiatives with which Sphere regularly engages are People 
In  (cid:40)id,  Groupe  (cid:60)R(cid:43)  (cid:15)(cid:60)rgence,  R(cid:116)habilitation,  (cid:43)(cid:116)veloppement(cid:16),  Coordination 
Sud  and  the  Active  Learning  Network  for  Accountability  and  Performance  in 
Humanitarian Action (ALNAP).

Beyond the Handbook
The Sphere Project’s primary and most used tool is this Handbook. It is also avail-
able in electronic format on the Sphere website (cid:15)www.sphereproject.org(cid:16), where 
you can get the latest news and updates about the available versions and other 
resources.

The  Handbook  exists  in  numerous  languages  and  is  accompanied  by  various 
training  and  promotional  materials.  These  are  often  adapted  to  local  contexts 
on  the  basis  of  the  experience  of  practitioners.  This  illustrates  the  vibrancy  of 
the  Sphere  community  of  practice,  a  sometimes  informal,  loosely  connected 
and ever-expanding network of practitioners that keep the spirit of Sphere alive. 
The  Sphere  Project  is  founded  on  the  need  to  help  improve  the  humanitarian 
response to meet the rights and needs of disaster- or con(cid:197)ict-affected people 
and to be accountable to them. The Sphere Project has made great progress 
since its inception, but no Handbook alone can achieve this (cid:182) only you can.

13

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Outline of the cross-cutting themes
The  cross-cutting  themes  in  this  Handbook  focus  on  particular  areas  of 
concern in disaster response and address individual, group or general vulner-
ability issues. In this section, each theme is described in some detail.

Children: Special measures must be taken to ensure all children are protected 
from  harm  and  given  equitable  access  to  basic  services.  As  children  often 
form the larger part of an affected population, it is crucial that their views and 
experiences are not only elicited during emergency assessments and planning 
but that they also in(cid:197)uence humanitarian service delivery and its monitoring 
and evaluation. Children and young people are prone to the harmful impact of 
vulnerability in certain situations, such as malnutrition, exploitation, abduction 
and recruitment into armed groups and (cid:196)ghting forces, sexual violence and 
lack of opportunity to participate in decision-making. The Convention on the 
Rights of the Child states that a child is considered to be an individual below 
the age of 1(cid:31) years. This de(cid:196)nition can differ depending on cultural and social 
contexts. (cid:40) thorough analysis of how an affected population de(cid:196)nes children 
must be undertaken, to ensure that no child or young person is excluded from 
humanitarian assistance.

Disaster  risk  reduction:  This  is  de(cid:196)ned  as  the  concept  and  practice  of 
reducing disaster risks through systematic efforts to analyse and manage the 
causal factors of disasters, including through reduced exposure to ha(cid:97)ards, 
lessened  vulnerability  of  people  and  property,  wise  management  of  land 
and the environment, and improved preparedness for adverse events. Such 
adverse  events  include  natural  disasters  like  storms,  (cid:197)oods,  droughts  and 
sea-level  rise.  (cid:40)s  they  appear  to  become  increasingly  variable  and  severe, 
these phenomena are increasingly attributed to global climate change.

Environment: The environment is understood as the physical, chemical and 
biological  elements  and  processes  that  affect  disaster-affected  and  local 
populations’ lives and livelihoods. It provides the natural resources that sustain 
individuals and contributes to quality of life. It needs protection and manage-
ment  if  essential  functions  are  to  be  maintained.  The  minimum  standards 
address the need to prevent over-exploitation, pollution and degradation of 
environmental conditions and aim to secure the life-supporting functions of 
the environment, reduce risk and vulnerability and seek to introduce mecha-
nisms that foster adaptability of natural systems for self-recovery.

14

W h a t   i s   S p h e r e ?

Gender: Gender refers to the fact that people experience a situation differently 
according to their gender. Sex refers to biological attributes of women and 
men. It is natural, determined by birth and, therefore, generally unchanging 
and universal.

The equal rights of women and men are explicit in the human rights docu-
ments that form the basis of the Humanitarian Charter. Women and men have 
the same entitlement to humanitarian assistance and protection, to respect 
for their human dignity, to acknowledgement of their e(cid:88)ual human capacities 
including the capacity to make choices, to the same opportunities to act on 
those choices and to the same level of power to shape the outcome of their 
actions. Humanitarian responses are more effective when they are based on 
an understanding of the different needs, vulnerabilities, interests, capacities 
and coping strategies of women and men, girls and boys of all ages and the 
differing impacts of disaster or con(cid:197)ict upon them. The understanding of these 
differences, as well as ine(cid:88)ualities in women(cid:187)s and men(cid:187)s roles and workloads, 
access  to  and  control  over  resources,  decision-making  power  and  oppor-
tunities for skills development, is achieved through gender analysis. Gender 
cuts across other cross-cutting themes. The humanitarian aims of proportion-
ality and impartiality mean that attention must be paid to achieving fairness 
between  women  and  men  and  ensuring  e(cid:88)uality  of  outcome.  Historically, 
attention to gender relations has been driven by the need to address women’s 
and girls(cid:187) needs and circumstances, as women and girls are typically more 
disadvantaged than men and boys. However, increasingly, the humanitarian 
community recognises the need to understand what men and boys face in 
crisis situations.

HIV and AIDS: (cid:50)nowing the HI(cid:61) prevalence in a speci(cid:196)c humanitarian context 
is important to understand vulnerabilities and risks and to plan an effective 
response. In addition to the most at-risk populations (i.e. men who have sex 
with men, intravenous drug users and sex workers(cid:16), who often need to receive 
speci(cid:196)c measures to protect themselves against neglect, discrimination and 
violence, some contexts may have other vulnerable groups such as refugees, 
migrants, youth and single mothers. Mass displacement may lead to increased 
HI(cid:61) vulnerabilities and risks due to separation of family members and break-
down  of  community  cohesion  and  of  social  and  sexual  norms  regulating 
behaviour. Women and children may be exploited by armed groups and be 
particularly vulnerable to HI(cid:61) due to sexual violence and exploitation. (cid:43)uring 
humanitarian emergencies, people may no longer have access to HI(cid:61) inter-
ventions such as prevention programmes and the disruption of anti-retroviral 

15

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

therapy (cid:15)(cid:40)RT(cid:16), tuberculosis (cid:15)T(cid:41)(cid:16) treatment and prevention and treatment for 
other opportunistic infections may occur.

People  living  with  HI(cid:61)  (cid:15)PLHI(cid:61)(cid:16)  often  suffer  from  discrimination  and  stigma 
and, therefore, con(cid:196)dentiality must be strictly adhered to and protection made 
available when needed. The sector activities in this Handbook should provide 
appropriate HI(cid:61) interventions according to prevalence and context, and not 
increase people(cid:187)s vulnerabilities and risks to HI(cid:61).

Older people: Older men and women are those aged over (cid:29)(cid:23) years, according 
to the (cid:60)N, but a de(cid:196)nition of (cid:186)older(cid:187) can vary in different contexts. Older people 
are often among the poorest in developing countries and comprise a large 
and growing proportion of the most vulnerable in disaster- or con(cid:197)ict-affected 
populations (cid:15)for example, the over-(cid:31)(cid:23)s are the fastest-growing age group in 
the  world(cid:16)  and  yet  they  are  often  neglected  in  disaster  or  con(cid:197)ict  manage-
ment.  Isolation  and  physical  weakness  are  signi(cid:196)cant  factors  exacerbating 
vulnerability in older people in disasters or con(cid:197)ict, along with disruption to 
livelihood strategies and to family and community support structures, chronic 
health  and  mobility  problems,  and  declining  mental  health.  Special  efforts 
must be made to identify and reach housebound older people and house-
holds headed by older people. Older people also have key contributions to 
make in survival and rehabilitation. They play vital roles as carers of children, 
resource  managers  and  income  generators,  have  knowledge  and  experi-
ence of community coping strategies and help to preserve cultural and social 
identities.

Persons  with  disabilities:  The  World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  esti-
mates that between 7 and 10 per cent of the world’s population – including 
children  and  older  people  (cid:182)  live  with  disabilities.  (cid:43)isasters  and  con(cid:197)ict  can 
cause increased incidence of impairment and subsequent disability. The UN 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with (cid:43)isabilities (cid:15)CRP(cid:43)(cid:16) de(cid:196)nes disability 
as an evolving concept that results from the interaction between persons with 
impairments  (cid:15)which  may  be  physical,  sensory,  intellectual  or  psychosocial(cid:16) 
and the attitudinal and environmental barriers that hinder their full and effec-
tive participation in society on an e(cid:88)ual basis with others. It is, therefore, the 
presence of these barriers that prevent persons with disabilities from fully and 
meaningfully  participating  in,  or  bene(cid:196)ting  from,  mainstream  humanitarian 
assistance  programmes.  The  new  CRP(cid:43)  makes  speci(cid:196)c  reference  to  the 
safety and protection of persons with disabilities in con(cid:197)ict and emergency 
situations (Article 11).

16

W h a t   i s   S p h e r e ?

Persons with disabilities face disproportionate risks in disaster situations and 
are  often  excluded  from  relief  and  rehabilitation  processes.  Such  exclusion 
makes it more dif(cid:196)cult to effectively use and participate in standard disaster 
support services. Importantly, persons with disabilities are a diverse popula-
tion including children and older people, whose needs cannot be addressed 
in a (cid:186)one si(cid:97)e (cid:196)ts all(cid:187) approach. Humanitarian responses, therefore, must take 
into consideration the particular abilities, skills, resources and knowledge of 
individuals with different types and degrees of impairments. It is also impor-
tant to remember that persons with disabilities have the same basic needs as 
everyone else in their communities. In addition, some may also have speci(cid:196)c 
needs, such as replacement of aids or appliances, and access to rehabilita-
tion services. Furthermore, any measures targeting persons with disabilities 
must not lead to their separation from their family and community networks. 
Finally, if the rights of persons with disabilities are not taken into consideration 
in humanitarian responses, a huge opportunity is lost to rebuild communities 
for all people. It is essential, therefore, to include persons with disabilities in all 
aspects of relief and recovery. This requires both mainstreamed and targeted 
responses.

Psychosocial  support:  Some  of  the  greatest  sources  of  vulnerability  and 
suffering in disasters arise from the complex emotional, social, physical and 
spiritual  effects  of  disasters.  Many  of  these  reactions  are  normal  and  can 
be overcome with time. It is essential to organise locally appropriate mental 
health  and  psychosocial  supports  that  promote  self-help,  coping  and  resil-
ience among affected people. Humanitarian action is strengthened if at the 
earliest  appropriate  moment,  affected  people  are  engaged  in  guiding  and 
implementing the disaster response. In each humanitarian sector, the manner 
in which aid is administered has a psychosocial impact that may either support 
or cause harm to affected people. Aid should be delivered in a compassionate 
manner  that  promotes  dignity,  enables  self-ef(cid:196)cacy  through  meaningful 
participation, respects the importance of religious and cultural practices and 
strengthens the ability of affected people to support holistic well-being.

References

UN Convention on the Rights of the Child: www2.ohchr.org/english/law/crc.htm
UN  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  Persons  with  Disabilities:  www.un.org/
disabilities/
WHO on disabilities: www.who.int/disabilities/en/

17

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

18
18

The  
Humanitarian  
Charter

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The  Humanitarian  Charter  provides  the  ethical  and  legal  backdrop  to  the 
Protection  Principles  and  the  Core  Standards  and  minimum  standards  that 
follow in the Handbook. It is in part a statement of established legal rights and 
obligations; in part a statement of shared belief.

In terms of legal rights and obligations, it summarises the core legal principles 
that have most bearing on the welfare of those affected by disaster or con(cid:197)ict. 
With regard to shared belief, it attempts to capture a consensus among humani-
tarian agencies as to the principles which should govern the response to disaster 
or con(cid:197)ict, including the roles and responsibilities of the various actors involved.

It  forms  the  basis  of  a  commitment  by  humanitarian  agencies  that  endorse 
Sphere and an invitation to all those who engage in humanitarian action to adopt 
the same principles.

The Humanitarian Charter

Our beliefs
1.  The  Humanitarian  Charter  expresses  our  shared  conviction  as  humanitarian 
agencies that all people affected by disaster or con(cid:197)ict have a right to receive protec-
tion and assistance to ensure the basic conditions for life with dignity. We believe 
that the principles described in this Humanitarian Charter are universal, applying 
to all those affected by disaster or con(cid:197)ict wherever they may be, and to all those 
who seek to assist them or provide for their security. These principles are re(cid:197)ected 
in  international  law,  but  derive  their  force  ultimately  from  the  fundamental  moral 
principle of humanity: that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and 
rights. (cid:41)ased on this principle, we af(cid:196)rm the primacy of the humanitarian imper-
ative: that action should be taken to prevent or alleviate human suffering arising out 
of disaster or con(cid:197)ict, and that nothing should override this principle.

(cid:40)s  local,  national  and  international  humanitarian  agencies,  we  commit  to 
promoting and adhering to the principles in this Charter and to meeting minimum 
standards in our efforts to assist and protect those affected. We invite all those 
who engage in humanitarian activities, including governmental and private sector 
actors, to endorse the common principles, rights and duties set out below as a 
statement of shared humanitarian belief.

Our role
(cid:25).  We  acknowledge  that  it  is  (cid:196)rstly  through  their  own  efforts,  and  through  the 
support  of  community  and  local  institutions,  that  the  basic  needs  of  people 

20

T h e   H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r

affected by disaster or con(cid:197)ict are met. We recognise the primary role and respon-
sibility  of  the  affected  state  to  provide  timely  assistance  to  those  affected,  to 
ensure people’s protection and security and to provide support for their recovery. 
We believe that a combination of of(cid:196)cial and voluntary action is crucial to effective 
prevention and response, and in this regard National Societies of the Red Cross 
and Red Crescent Movement and other civil society actors have an essential role 
to play in supporting public authorities. Where national capacity is insuf(cid:196)cient, 
we af(cid:196)rm the role of the wider international community, including governmental 
donors and regional organisations, in assisting states to ful(cid:196)l their responsibilities. 
We recognise and support the special roles played by the mandated agencies of 
the United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross.

(cid:26). (cid:40)s humanitarian agencies, we interpret our role in relation to the needs and 
capacities of affected populations and the responsibilities of their governments or 
controlling powers. Our role in providing assistance re(cid:197)ects the reality that those 
with  primary  responsibility  are  not  always  fully  able  to  perform  this  role  them-
selves, or may be unwilling to do so. (cid:40)s far as possible, consistent with meeting 
the humanitarian imperative and other principles set out in this Charter, we will 
support the efforts of the relevant authorities to protect and assist those affected. 
We call upon all state and non-state actors to respect the impartial, independent 
and  non-partisan  role  of  humanitarian  agencies  and  to  facilitate  their  work  by 
removing unnecessary legal and practical barriers, providing for their safety and 
allowing them timely and consistent access to affected populations.

Common principles, rights and duties
4. We offer our services as humanitarian agencies on the basis of the principle 
of humanity and the humanitarian imperative, recognising the rights of all people 
affected by disaster or con(cid:197)ict (cid:182) women and men, boys and girls. These include 
the rights to protection and assistance re(cid:197)ected in the provisions of international 
humanitarian law, human rights and refugee law. For the purposes of this Charter, 
we summarise these rights as follows:

 »

 »

 »

the right to life with dignity

the right to receive humanitarian assistance

the right to protection and security.

While  these  rights  are  not  formulated  in  such  terms  in  international  law,  they 
encapsulate a range of established legal rights and give fuller substance to the 
humanitarian imperative.

21

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

(cid:28).  The  right  to  life  with  dignity  is  re(cid:197)ected  in  the  provisions  of  international 
law, and speci(cid:196)cally the human rights measures concerning the right to life, to 
an ade(cid:88)uate standard of living and to freedom from torture or cruel, inhuman or 
degrading treatment or punishment. The right to life entails the duty to preserve 
life where it is threatened. Implicit in this is the duty not to withhold or frustrate the 
provision of life-saving assistance. (cid:43)ignity entails more than physical well-being; 
it demands respect for the whole person, including the values and beliefs of indi-
viduals and affected communities, and respect for their human rights, including 
liberty, freedom of conscience and religious observance.

6. The right to receive humanitarian assistance is a necessary element of 
the right to life with dignity. This encompasses the right to an adequate standard 
of living, including ade(cid:88)uate food, water, clothing, shelter and the re(cid:88)uirements 
for good health, which are expressly guaranteed in international law. The Sphere 
Core  Standards  and  minimum  standards  re(cid:197)ect  these  rights  and  give  prac-
tical expression to them, speci(cid:196)cally in relation to the provision of assistance to 
those  affected  by  disaster  or  con(cid:197)ict.  Where  the  state  or  non-state  actors  are 
not providing such assistance themselves, we believe they must allow others to 
help do so. Any such assistance must be provided according to the principle of 
impartiality, which re(cid:88)uires that it be provided solely on the basis of need and in 
proportion to need. This re(cid:197)ects the wider principle of non-discrimination: that 
no one should be discriminated against on any grounds of status, including age, 
gender,  race,  colour,  ethnicity,  sexual  orientation,  language,  religion,  disability, 
health status, political or other opinion, national or social origin.

7.  The  right  to  protection  and  security  is  rooted  in  the  provisions  of  inter-
national  law,  in  resolutions  of  the  (cid:60)nited  Nations  and  other  intergovernmental 
organisations,  and  in  the  sovereign  responsibility  of  states  to  protect  all  those 
within their jurisdiction. The safety and security of people in situations of disaster 
or  con(cid:197)ict  are  of  particular  humanitarian  concern,  including  the  protection  of 
refugees and internally displaced persons. (cid:40)s the law recognises, some people 
may be particularly vulnerable to abuse and adverse discrimination due to their 
status such as age, gender or race, and may re(cid:88)uire special measures of protec-
tion and assistance. To the extent that a state lacks the capacity to protect people 
in these circumstances, we believe it must seek international assistance to do so.

The  law  relating  to  the  protection  of  civilians  and  displaced  people  demands 
particular attention here:

(i)  During armed conﬂict as de(cid:196)ned in international humanitarian law, speci(cid:196)c 
legal provision is made for protection and assistance to be given to those 
not  engaged  in  the con(cid:197)ict.  In particular, the  19(cid:27)9  Geneva Conventions 
and  the  Additional  Protocols  of  1977  impose  obligations  on  the  parties 

22

T h e   H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r

to both international and non-international armed con(cid:197)icts. We stress the 
general immunity of the civilian population from attack and reprisals, and in 
particular the importance of the principle of distinction between civilians 
and combatants, and between civilian objects and military objectives; the 
principles of proportionality in the use of force and precaution in attack; 
the  duty  to  refrain  from  the  use  of  weapons  which  are  indiscriminate or 
which, by their nature, cause super(cid:197)uous injury or unnecessary suffering; 
and the duty to permit impartial relief to be provided. Much of the avoid-
able suffering caused to civilians in armed con(cid:197)icts stems from a failure to 
observe these basic principles.

(ii)  The right to seek asylum or sanctuary remains vital to the protection of 
those facing persecution or violence. Those affected by disaster or con(cid:197)ict 
are often forced to (cid:197)ee their homes in search of security and the means of 
subsistence. The provisions of the 19(cid:28)1 Convention Relating to the Status 
of  Refugees  (as  amended)  and  other  international  and  regional  treaties 
provide fundamental safeguards for those unable to secure protection from 
the state of their nationality or residence who are forced to seek safety in 
another country. Chief among these is the principle of non-refoulement: 
the principle that no one shall be sent back to a country where their life, 
freedom or physical security would be threatened or where they are likely 
to face torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punish-
ment.  The  same  principle  applies  by  extension  to  internally  displaced 
persons, as re(cid:197)ected in international human rights law and elaborated in 
the 1998 Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement and related regional 
and national law.

Our commitment
8. We offer our services in the belief that the affected population is at the centre 
of humanitarian action, and recognise that their active participation is essential to 
providing assistance in ways that best meet their needs, including those of vulner-
able and socially excluded people. We will endeavour to support local efforts to 
prevent, prepare for and respond to disaster, and to the effects of con(cid:197)ict, and to 
reinforce the capacities of local actors at all levels.

9. We are aware that attempts to provide humanitarian assistance may some-
times  have  unintended  adverse  effects.  In  collaboration  with  affected  commu-
nities and authorities, we aim to minimise any negative effects of humanitarian 
action  on  the  local  community  or  on  the  environment.  With  respect  to  armed 
con(cid:197)ict, we recognise that the way in which humanitarian assistance is provided 
may potentially render civilians more vulnerable to attack, or may on occasion 
bring unintended advantage to one or more of the parties to the con(cid:197)ict. We are 

23

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e
H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

committed to minimising any such adverse effects, in so far as this is consistent 
with the principles outlined above.

10. We will act in accordance with the principles of humanitarian action set out 
in  this  Charter  and  with  the  speci(cid:196)c  guidance  in  the  Code  of  Conduct  for  the 
International  Red  Cross  and  Red  Crescent  Movement  and  Non-Governmental 
Organisations (NGOs) in Disaster Relief (1994).

11. The Sphere Core Standards and minimum standards give practical substance 
to  the  common  principles  in  this  Charter,  based  on  agencies(cid:187)  understanding 
of the basic minimum requirements for life with dignity and their experience of 
providing  humanitarian  assistance.  Though  the  achievement  of  the  standards 
depends on a range of factors, many of which may be beyond our control, we 
commit ourselves to attempting consistently to achieve them and we expect to 
be held to account accordingly. We invite all parties, including affected and donor 
governments, international organisations, private and non-state actors, to adopt 
the Sphere Core Standards and minimum standards as accepted norms.

1(cid:25). (cid:41)y adhering to the Core Standards and minimum standards, we commit to 
making every effort to ensure that people affected by disasters or con(cid:197)ict have 
access to at least the minimum re(cid:88)uirements for life with dignity and security, 
including  ade(cid:88)uate  water,  sanitation,  food,  nutrition,  shelter  and  healthcare. 
To  this  end,  we  will  continue  to  advocate  that  states  and  other  parties  meet 
their moral and legal obligations towards affected populations. For our part, we 
undertake to make our responses more effective, appropriate and accountable 
through  sound  assessment  and  monitoring  of  the  evolving  local  context; 
through transparency of information and decision-making; and through more 
effective coordination and collaboration with other relevant actors at all levels, 
as  detailed  in  the  Core  Standards  and  minimum  standards.  In  particular,  we 
commit to working in partnership with affected populations, emphasising their 
active  participation  in  the  response.  We  acknowledge  that  our  fundamental 
accountability must be to those we seek to assist.

24
24

Protection Principles

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

How to use this chapter

Humanitarian action consists of two main pillars: protection and assistance. Much of this Handbook, 
in particular the technical chapters, falls within the remit of assistance, while this chapter focuses 
on protection. Building on the Humanitarian Charter, it addresses the question of how humanitarian 
agencies can contribute to the protection of those faced with the threat of violence or coercion. More 
generally, it is concerned with the role of agencies in ensuring respect for and fulﬁlment of the rights 
articulated in the Charter, including access to assistance. 

The chapter is divided into two sections:

 

 

 An  introduction,  which  sets  out  the  general  responsibilities  of  all  who  are  involved  in 
humanitarian response to help protect the affected population and ensure respect for their 
rights.

 Four  Protection  Principles,  which  underpin  all  humanitarian  action  and  encompass  the 
basic elements of protection in the context of humanitarian response. They are accompanied 
by guidance notes, which further elaborate the role of humanitarian agencies in protection.  
A reference section includes other standards and materials relating to more specialised areas 
of protection.

26

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

Contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

Protection Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

References and further reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44

27

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Humanitarian 

Charter

Protection Principles

Principle 1
Avoid exposing 
people to further 
harm as a result 
of your actions

Principle 2
Ensure people’s 
access to impartial 
assistance

Principle 3
Protect people 
from physical and 
psychological harm 
due to violence 
or coercion

Principle 4
Assist with rights 
claims, access 
to remedies 
and recovery 
from abuse

References and further reading

28

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

Introduction
Protection and humanitarian response

Protection  is  concerned  with  the  safety,  dignity  and  rights  of  people  affected 
by  disaster  or  armed  con(cid:197)ict.  The  Humanitarian  Charter  summarises  some  of 
the most fundamental rights involved in humanitarian response. This chapter is 
concerned with the way these rights should inform humanitarian practice from 
a protection perspective and, speci(cid:196)cally, the way agencies can avoid exposing 
the affected population to further harm and how they can help people to achieve 
greater safety and security.

Core humanitarian protection concerns in this context are freedom from violence 
and from coercion of various kinds and freedom from deliberate deprivation of the 
means of survival with dignity.

These  concerns  give  rise  to  four  basic  Protection  Principles  that  inform  all 
humanitarian action:

1.  Avoid exposing people to further harm as a result of your actions
2.  Ensure people’s access to impartial assistance – in proportion to need 

and without discrimination

(cid:26).  Protect  people  from  physical  and  psychological  harm  arising  from 

violence and coercion

4.  (cid:40)ssist people to claim their rights, access available remedies and recover 

from the effects of abuse.

In the context of humanitarian response, these four Principles re(cid:197)ect the more 
severe  threats  that  people  commonly  face  in  times  of  con(cid:197)ict  or  disaster.  The 
guidance notes address the related responsibilities and options for agencies, as 
well as particular protection needs.

The four Protection Principles follow from the summary of rights set out in the 
Humanitarian Charter: the right to life with dignity, the right to humanitarian assis-
tance and the right to protection and security.

29

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Understanding the Protection Principles

The following is a short guide to interpreting the Protection Principles:

Principle 1 (avoid causing harm) addresses those protection concerns that may 
be caused or exacerbated by humanitarian response. (cid:40)s stated in the Charter, 
those  involved  in  humanitarian  response  must  do  all  they  reasonably  can  to 
avoid exposing people affected by disaster or armed con(cid:197)ict to further harm, for 
example by building settlements for displaced people in unsafe areas.

Principle 2 (ensure access to impartial assistance) sets out the responsibility to 
ensure that humanitarian assistance is available to all those in need, particularly 
those who are most vulnerable or who face exclusion on political or other grounds. 
The  denial  of  access  to  necessary  assistance  is  a  major  protection  concern. 
This may include (but is not limited to) denial of secure access for humanitarian 
agencies to provide assistance.

Principle  3  (protect  people  from  violence)  is  concerned  with  protection  from 
violence and protection from being forced or induced to act against one(cid:187)s will, 
e.g. to take up arms, to be forcibly removed from a place or to be prevented from 
moving, or to be subjected to degrading treatment or punishment. It is concerned 
with  preventing  or  mitigating  physical  and  psychological  harm,  including  the 
spread of fear and deliberate creation of terror or panic.

Principle  4  (cid:15)assist  with  rights  claims,  access  to  remedies  and  recovery  from 
abuse) refers to the role of humanitarian agencies in helping affected people claim 
their entitlements and access remedies such as legal redress, compensation or 
restitution  of  property.  It  is  also  concerned  with  helping  people  overcome  the 
effects of rape and, more generally, with helping people recover from the effects 
of abuse (cid:182) physical and psychological, social and economic.

Together with the guidance notes, the four Protection Principles describe what 
humanitarian agencies can and should do to help protect the disaster-affected 
population. But it is essential to note that the roles and responsibilities of agencies 
in this context are generally secondary ones. (cid:40)s the Charter states, such roles 
must be seen in relation to the primary duty of the state or other relevant authori-
ties, e.g. parties to a con(cid:197)ict who control or occupy territory. Such authorities hold 
formal, legal responsibility for the welfare of people within their territory or control 
and, more generally, for the safety of civilians in armed con(cid:197)ict.

(cid:60)ltimately, it is these authorities that have the means to ensure the affected popu-
lation’s security through action or restraint. The key role of agencies may be to 

30

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

encourage and persuade them to do so, and to assist people in dealing with the 
consequences when the authorities fail in their responsibility.

Putting the Protection Principles into practice

In  order  to  meet  the  standards  of  this  Handbook,  all  humanitarian  agencies 
should be guided by the Protection Principles, even if they do not have a distinct 
protection mandate or specialist capacity in protection. 

The Principles are not ‘absolute’: it is recognised that circumstances may limit 
the  extent  to  which  agencies  are  able  to  ful(cid:196)l  them.  In  particular,  aspects  of 
Principle (cid:26) may not lie within an agency(cid:187)s capacity. Nevertheless, the Principles 
re(cid:197)ect universal humanitarian concerns which should guide action at all times.

(cid:40) number of humanitarian agencies have protection mandates or speci(cid:196)c roles 
concerning  vulnerable  groups.  Several  of  these  agencies  carry  out  protection 
activities  as  stand-alone  programmes  or  projects,  or  framed  within  (cid:186)protection 
cluster’ or ‘protection sector’ responses with dedicated resources and specialised 
staff. In (cid:25)(cid:23)11, the Global Protection Cluster includes coordination structures with 
focal points for the following particular areas of concern:

 »

 »

 »

child protection

gender-based violence

housing, land and property

 » mine action

 »

rule of law and justice.

This list illustrates some of the speci(cid:196)c areas of protection. It is not a comprehen-
sive list and it should be recognised that there are many other speci(cid:196)c protection 
concerns. 

For a number of these and other protection topics, such as the protection of civil-
ians and internally displaced persons or protection in natural disasters, speci(cid:196)c 
standards and guidelines have been developed as part of initiatives other than 
Sphere. These are listed in the References and further reading section at the end 
of this chapter. This chapter is designed to complement such standards.

31

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Different modes of protection activity

The  four  Protection  Principles  apply  as  much  to  specialist  protection  activity 
as  to  general  humanitarian  action,  though  the  activities  may  be  different.  The 
protection-related activities of all humanitarian agencies can be classi(cid:196)ed broadly 
according to the following three modes of activity, which are inter-dependent and 
may be carried out simultaneously:

 »

Preventive: Preventing physical threats or rights abuses from occurring 
or reducing exposure or vulnerability to such threats and abuses. Preventing 
protection threats also includes efforts to foster an environment conducive 
to respect for the rights of women, men, girls and boys of all ages in accor-
dance with international law.

 » Responsive: Stopping ongoing violations by responding to incidents of 

violence and other rights abuses.

 » Remedial: Providing remedies to ongoing or past abuses, through repara-
tion  and  rehabilitation,  by  offering  healthcare,  psychosocial  support,  legal 
assistance or other services and supports, and helping the affected popula-
tion to access available remedies and claim their rights.

(cid:40)dvocacy, whether public or private, is a common element linking these three 
modes  of  activity.  The  threats  to  the  affected  population  arise  from  deliberate 
decisions, actions or policies and many of the related protection responses are 
about attempting to change such behaviours and policies. Advocacy by humani-
tarian  agencies  and  others,  such  as  human  rights  organisations,  is  central  to 
the attempt to in(cid:197)uence such change. There may be tensions for humanitarian 
agencies  between  ‘speaking  out’  about  abuses  and  the  need  to  maintain  an 
operational presence, and these tensions may dictate whether and how they can 
undertake advocacy on a given issue.

Where advocacy is pursued, its success generally depends on access to reliable 
evidence,  stakeholder  analysis  and  thorough  context  analysis.  It  is  thus  linked 
to  the  assessment  standard  in  the  Core  Standards  (cid:15)see  Core  Standard  (cid:26)  on 
page (cid:29)1(cid:16). (cid:40)s the guidance notes below make clear, any use of evidence such 
as witness statements that allows the source of information to be identi(cid:196)ed may 
be highly sensitive as it may put people at risk, and should be treated with the 
greatest care (cid:15)see Protection Principle 1, guidance note (cid:31) on page (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:16).

32

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

Protection Principles

Protection Principle 1: Avoid exposing people to further harm 
as a result of your actions 

Those  involved  in  humanitarian  response  take  steps  to  avoid  or 
minimise any adverse effects of their intervention, in particular the 
risk of exposing people to increased danger or abuse of their rights.

This Principle includes the following elements:

 »

 »

The  form  of  humanitarian  assistance  and  the  environment  in  which  it  is 
provided do not further expose people to physical ha(cid:97)ards, violence or other 
rights abuse.

Assistance and protection efforts do not undermine the affected population’s 
capacity for self-protection.

 » Humanitarian agencies manage sensitive information in a way that does not 
jeopardise the security of the informants or those who may be identi(cid:196)able 
from the information.

Guidance notes
Assessing context and anticipating the consequences of humanitarian action 
for the safety and well-being of the disaster-affected population

1.  Avoid becoming complicit in abuse of rights. There may be dif(cid:196)cult judge-
ments and choices, for example when faced with the decision whether to 
provide assistance to people who are detained in camps against their will. 
Such judgements must be made on a case-by-case basis, but they should 
always be reviewed over time as circumstances change.

2.  Checklist: When analysing activities, regularly re(cid:197)ect on the following non-
exhaustive list of (cid:88)uestions, which could serve as a checklist, in terms of both 
the overall humanitarian response and speci(cid:196)c actions:

 - What does the affected population gain by our activities?

33

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 - What might be the unintended negative consequences of our activi-
ties  for  people(cid:187)s  security,  and  how  can  we  avoid  or  minimise  these 
consequences?

 - Do  the  activities  take  into  consideration  possible  protection  threats 
facing the affected population? Might they undermine people’s own 
efforts to protect themselves?

 - Do  the  activities  discriminate  against  any  group  or  might  they  be 
perceived as doing so? Do the activities protect the rights of people 
who have historically been marginalised or discriminated against?

 - In protecting and promoting the rights of such groups, what will be the 

impact on the relationships within and beyond the community?

 - Could the activities exacerbate existing divisions in the community or 

between neighbouring communities?

 - Could the activities inadvertently empower or strengthen the position 

of armed groups or other actors?

 - Could the activities be subject to criminal exploitation?

3.  Consult different segments of the affected population – or organisations in 
their trust – in assessing the positive and possible negative consequences of 
the overall response and speci(cid:196)c activities.

4.  The form in which assistance is provided may render people more vulner-
able to attack. For example, valuable commodities like dry food rations may 
be subject to looting and so can put the recipients at risk of harm and depri-
vation.  Consider  providing  alternative  forms  of  assistance  (e.g.  provision 
of  cooked  food  at  kitchens  or  feeding  centres(cid:16)  where  this  is  a  signi(cid:196)cant 
risk. Affected communities should be consulted on their preferred form of 
assistance.

5.  The  environment  in  which  assistance  is  provided  should,  as  far  as 
possible, be safe for the people concerned. People in need should not be 
forced to travel to or through dangerous areas in order to access assistance. 
Where camps or other settlements are established, these should be made as 
safe as possible for the inhabitants and should be located away from areas 
that are subject to attack or other hazards.

Self-protection of affected populations

6.  Understand  the  means  by  which  people  try  to  protect  themselves,  their 
families  and  communities.  Support  community  self-help  initiatives  (see 
Protection Principle (cid:26), guidance notes 1(cid:26)(cid:182)1(cid:27) on page (cid:27)(cid:23)(cid:16). The ways in which 
humanitarian agencies intervene should not compromise people’s capacity 
to  protect  themselves  and  others  –  including  moving  to  safer  areas  and 
avoiding contact with armed groups.

34

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

7.  Subsistence needs: Help people (cid:196)nd safe options for meeting their subsis-
tence needs. This might include, for example, the provision of goods such 
as water, (cid:196)rewood or other cooking fuel that helps people meet their daily 
needs without having to undertake hazardous and arduous journeys. This is 
likely to be a particular issue for older people, women, children and persons 
with disabilities.

Managing sensitive information

8.  Protection-related data may be sensitive. Humanitarian agencies should 
have clear policies and procedures in place to guide their staff on how to 
respond if they become aware of, or witness, abuses and on the con(cid:196)denti-
ality of related information. Staff should be briefed on appropriate reporting 
of witnessed incidents or allegations.

9.  Referring sensitive information: Consider referring information concerning 
abuses  to  appropriate  actors  with  the  relevant  protection  mandate.  These 
actors may be present in other areas than where the information is found.

10.  A policy on referring sensitive information should be in place and should 
include incident reports or trends analysis. It should specify how to manage 
sensitive information and the circumstances under which information may be 
referred. (cid:40)s far as possible, agencies should seek the consent of the indi-
viduals concerned for the use of such information. Any referral of information 
should be done in a way that does not put the source of information or the 
person(s) referred to in danger.

11.  Information on speciﬁc abuses and violations of rights should only be 
collected  if  its  intended  use  is  clear  and  the  detail  re(cid:88)uired  is  de(cid:196)ned  in 
relation to the intended use. Such protection information should be collected 
by agencies with a protection mandate or which have the necessary capacity, 
skills, systems and protocols in place. Collecting this information is subject to 
the condition of informed consent and, in all cases, the individual(cid:187)s consent 
is necessary for the information to be shared with third parties.

12.  The possible reaction of the government or other relevant authorities to 
the  collection  and  use  of  information  about  abuses  should  be  assessed. 
The need for the continuation of operations may have to be weighed against 
the need to use the information. Different humanitarian agencies may make 
different choices in this regard.

35

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Protection Principle 2: Ensure people’s access to impartial 
assistance – in proportion to need and without discrimination

People can access humanitarian assistance according to need and 
without  adverse  discrimination.  Assistance  is  not  withheld  from 
people in need, and access for humanitarian agencies is provided 
as necessary to meet the Sphere standards.

This Principle includes the following elements:

 »

 »

 »

Ensure  access  for  all  parts  of  the  affected  population  to  humanitarian 
assistance.

Any deliberate deprivation to parts of the population of the means of subsis-
tence should always be challenged on the basis of relevant law and general 
humanitarian principles, as described in the Humanitarian Charter.

Affected people receive support on the basis of need and are not discrimi-
nated against on other grounds.

Guidance notes
Maintaining access

1.  Where the affected population is unable to meet their basic needs and 
the relevant authorities are unable to provide the necessary assistance them-
selves, the latter should not deny access for impartial humanitarian organisa-
tions to do so. Such denial may be in violation of international law, particularly 
in situations of armed con(cid:197)ict.

2.  Monitor access: Carefully monitor the access of the affected population to 

humanitarian assistance, especially of the most vulnerable people.

3.  Access to humanitarian assistance and to freedom of movement are 
closely linked (cid:15)see Protection Principle (cid:26), guidance notes 7(cid:182)9 on page (cid:26)9(cid:16). 
The monitoring of access should consider obstacles, such as checkpoints, 
blockades or the presence of landmines. In situations of armed con(cid:197)ict, the 
parties  may  establish  checkpoints,  but  these  barriers  should  not  discrimi-
nate between categories of affected people or unduly hinder people’s access 
to  humanitarian  assistance.  Special  measures  should  be  taken  to  ensure 
equality of access for affected people in remote or inaccessible regions.

36

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

4.  Special measures to facilitate the access of vulnerable groups should 
be taken, while considering the context, social and cultural conditions and 
behaviours of communities. Such measures might include the construction 
of safe spaces for people who have been the victims of abuses, such as rape 
or  traf(cid:196)cking,  or  putting  in  place  means  that  facilitate  access  for  persons 
with disabilities. Any such measures should avoid the stigmatisation of these 
groups (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:26), guidance notes (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29) on page (cid:29)(cid:26)(cid:16).

Addressing the denial of assistance or of access to subsistence needs

5.  The right to receive humanitarian assistance: As elaborated in the Human-
itarian Charter, the affected population has the right to receive humanitarian 
assistance. This right is derived from a number of legal norms and rules that 
are part of international law. More speci(cid:196)cally, international humanitarian law 
contains a number of relevant provisions on access to assistance and on the 
‘protection of objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population’ 
(1977 Additional Protocols I and II to the 1949 Geneva Conventions). Humani-
tarian agencies may consider promoting respect for the relevant laws (see 
also Protection Principle (cid:26), guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27) on pages (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:182)(cid:26)9(cid:16).

Ensuring non-discrimination

6. 

Impartiality:  Humanitarian  agencies  should  prioritise  the  affected  people 
they wish to assist on the basis of their need alone and provide assistance in 
proportion to need. This is the principle of impartiality af(cid:196)rmed in the Code of 
Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and 
NGOs in (cid:43)isaster Relief (cid:15)see (cid:40)nnex (cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:31) and also the Humanitarian 
Charter on page 19). Humanitarian agencies should not focus uniquely on a 
particular group (e.g. displaced people in camps) if this focus is at the detri-
ment of another section of the affected population.

7.  Affected people do not need to have a special legal status in order to 

receive humanitarian assistance and to be protected.

37

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Protection Principle 3: Protect people from physical and 
psychological harm arising from violence and coercion

People are protected from violence, from being forced or induced to 
act against their will and from fear of such abuse.

This Principle includes the following elements:

 »

 »

Take  all  reasonable  steps  to  ensure  that  the  affected  population  is  not 
subjected to violent attack, either by dealing with the source of the threat or 
by helping people to avoid the threat.

Take  all  reasonable  steps  to  ensure  that  the  affected  population  is  not 
subject to coercion, i.e. forced or induced to act against their will in ways 
that may cause them harm or violate their rights (for example the freedom of 
movement).

 »

Support the affected population(cid:187)s own efforts to stay safe, (cid:196)nd security and 
restore dignity, including community self-help mechanisms.

Guidance notes

Protection from violence and coercion

1.  The  primary  responsibility  to  protect  people  from  threats  to  their  lives 
and  safety  rests  with  governments  and  other  relevant  authorities  (see  the 
Humanitarian  Charter  on  page  19(cid:16).  In  times  of  armed  con(cid:197)ict,  the  parties 
engaged in con(cid:197)ict must protect the civilian population and those who have 
laid down their arms. In analysing the context in terms of the risks and threats 
for the population, humanitarian agencies should establish who has the legal 
responsibility and/or the actual capacity to provide protection.

2.  Help  minimise  other  threats:  This  includes  providing  assistance  in  such 
a way as to make people more secure, facilitating people(cid:187)s own efforts to 
stay safe or taking steps (though advocacy or otherwise) to reduce people’s 
exposure to risk.

3.  Monitoring  and  reporting:  Humanitarian  agencies  should  consider  their 
responsibility to monitor and report grave violations of rights. They should 
also consider advocating for the rights of affected populations with relevant 
authorities and actors by reminding them of their obligations. They may use 
different modes of action including diplomacy, lobbying and public advocacy, 
keeping in mind the guidance on managing sensitive information (see Protec-
tion Principle 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).

38

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

4.  During armed conﬂict, humanitarian agencies should consider monitoring 
the  institutions  that  are  speci(cid:196)cally  protected  under  international  humani-
tarian law, such as schools and hospitals, and reporting any attacks on them. 
Agencies should also make efforts to reduce the risks and threats of abduc-
tions or forced recruitment that may happen in these locations.

5.  Where  explosives  pose  a  threat  to  the  affected  population,  humani-
tarian  agencies  should  coordinate  with  the  relevant  government  authori-
ties and specialised agencies on the removal of landmines and unexploded 
ordnance. This threat may be particularly present in situations where popula-
tions are returning to their home areas following an armed con(cid:197)ict.

6.  Political,  law  enforcement  and  military  actors  play  signi(cid:196)cant  roles  in 
protecting people from abuses and violations. (cid:60)ltimately, it is in the political 
realm where solutions can be found to the underlying problems that are often 
at the heart of protection concerns. Security and law enforcement agencies, 
for example the police and military forces, including peacekeeping forces, 
can and should play an important role in ensuring the physical security of 
people at risk. Agencies can alert the relevant actors to ongoing violations. 
Such  interventions  with  military  contingents,  their  commanding  of(cid:196)cers  or 
the authorities under whose control these forces operate, may be an essen-
tial step in stopping violations by military forces.

Freedom of movement

7.  People  should  not  be  forced  to  stay  in,  or  go  to,  a  place  that  is  not  of 
their  choice  (such  as  a  camp)  nor  should  any  other  unreasonable  restric-
tions  be  placed  on  their  movement.  Restrictions  to  freedom  of  movement 
and choice of residence should only be made if there are serious security 
or health reasons and should be proportional to the aim. (cid:40)t all times, people 
affected by con(cid:197)ict or disaster have the right to seek asylum.

8.  Evacuations: Humanitarian agencies should only be involved in evacuations 
as exceptional measures in extreme circumstances, where there is no other 
way of providing urgent assistance or protection in the face of severe threats 
to life, security and health.

9. 

Incentives  to  remain  in  a  dangerous  place  should  not  be  provided  to 
the affected population nor should their return or resettlement be promoted 
when they do not have full access to all information on the conditions in those 
areas.

Particular vulnerabilities to violence and coercion

10.  Vulnerable people: Consideration should be given to individual, social and 
contextual factors in order to identify those most susceptible to certain risks 

39

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

and  threats.  Special  measures  may  be  needed  for  those  facing  particular 
risks, including women, children, people who have been forcibly displaced, 
older people, persons with disabilities and religious or ethnic minority groups.

11.  Safe  environments  for  children:  Agencies  should  provide  children  with 
access  to  safe  environments.  Families  and  communities  should  receive 
support in their efforts to keep children safe and secure.

12.  Children, especially when separated from their families or not accompa-
nied by an adult, can be more easily abused or exploited during disasters or 
con(cid:197)ict. (cid:40)gencies should take all reasonable steps to prevent children from 
being  recruited  into  armed  forces  and,  if  they  are  associated  with  armed 
forces, work on their immediate release and reintegration.

13.  Women  and  girls  can  be  at  particular  risk  of  gender-based  violence. 
When contributing to the protection of these groups, humanitarian agencies 
should particularly consider measures that reduce possible risks, including 
traf(cid:196)cking,  forced  prostitution,  rape  or  domestic  violence.  They  should 
also  implement  standards  and  instruments  that  prevent  and  eradicate  the 
practice of sexual exploitation and abuse. This unacceptable practice may 
involve  affected  people  with  speci(cid:196)c  vulnerabilities,  such  as  isolated  or 
disabled women who are forced to trade sex for the provision of humani-
tarian assistance.

Community-based social support and self-help

14.  Family  and  community  mechanisms  of  protection  and  psychoso-
cial  support  should  be  promoted  by  keeping  families  together,  teaching 
people how to prevent children from becoming separated from their families, 
promoting  appropriate  care  for  separated  children  and  organising  family 
tracing and reuni(cid:196)cation processes for separated children and other family 
members. Wherever possible, keep families together and enable people from 
a particular village or support network to live in the same area.

15.  Supporting  community  self-help  activities:  Such  activities  include,  for 
example, women(cid:187)s groups addressing issues of gender-based violence, youth 
groups  collaborating  on  livelihood  supports,  parenting  groups  supporting 
positive interactions with children and care for parents of young children and 
of children with special needs, youth groups spreading protective informa-
tion on threats such as landmines and community groups reaching out to 
women  and  men  who  have  lost  their  partners,  older  people  and  persons 
with disabilities.

40

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

Protection Principle 4: Assist people to claim their rights, access 
available remedies and recover from the effects of abuse

The affected population is helped to claim their rights through infor-
mation, documentation and assistance in seeking remedies. People 
are supported appropriately in recovering from the physical, psycho-
logical and social effects of violence and other abuses.

This Principle includes the following elements:

 »

 »

 »

Support affected people to assert their rights and to access remedies from 
government  or  other  sources  and  provide  them  with  information  on  their 
entitlements and available remedies.

Assist affected people in securing the documentation they need to demon-
strate their entitlements.

Assist affected people to recover by providing community-based and other 
psychosocial support.

Guidance notes

Supporting affected people in asserting their rights

1.  The  government  and  other  relevant  authorities  are  responsible  for 
ensuring that the rights of the affected population are respected and ful(cid:196)lled. 
Whether  through  legal  systems  or  other  channels,  humanitarian  agencies 
should consider supporting affected populations to claim their rights.

2.  Entitlements: Agencies should inform affected people of their entitlements 
both within a given aid programme and under the laws and regulations of 
the country in (cid:88)uestion. (cid:15)Re(cid:16)establishing people(cid:187)s rights to housing, land and 
property must be given particular attention.

3. 

Information and consultation: The affected population should be informed 
by authorities and humanitarian agencies in a language and manner they can 
understand. They should be engaged in a meaningful consultation process 
regarding  decisions  that  affect  their  lives,  without  creating  additional  risks 
(cid:15)see Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16). This is one way of assisting them to assert 
their rights.

41

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Documentation

4.  Securing  or  replacing  lost  documents:  Humanitarian  agencies  should 
assist the affected population in securing documentation – or replacing lost 
documents  –  in  order  to  access  their  rights.  People  generally  have  rights 
regardless of possessing particular documentation. But in order to access 
the  full  range  of  entitlements,  some  form  of  documentation  or  identi(cid:196)ca-
tion, such as a birth certi(cid:196)cate, marriage certi(cid:196)cate, passport or land title, 
is usually required. Access to property documentation is often particularly 
important following a disaster but in a number of countries, ownership is not 
necessarily clearly documented through legal titles and can become a major 
point of contention. (cid:43)eath certi(cid:196)cates need to be organised to avoid unnec-
essary (cid:196)nancial and legal problems for relatives. (cid:43)eath certi(cid:196)cates are usually 
not available when there is unceremonious disposal of corpses, a practice 
that should be avoided.

5.  Legal documentation recognised by the government or relevant authorities 
must  not  be  confused  with  documents  issued  by  humanitarian  agencies, 
such  as  registration  documents,  ration  cards  or  transportation  vouchers. 
Of(cid:196)cial  documentation  issued  by  authorities  should  not  determine  who  is 
eligible for assistance from humanitarian organisations.

Access to remedies

6.  People are entitled to seek legal and other redress from the government 
and relevant authorities for violations of their rights. This can include compen-
sation for loss or restitution of property. They are also entitled to expect that 
the perpetrators of such violations will be brought to justice. This can play a 
major role in restoring trust and con(cid:196)dence among the affected populations. 
Humanitarian agencies may be able to assist people in accessing justice or 
refer the issues to agencies that are able to provide such support.

7.  Healthcare  and  rehabilitation  support:  People  should  be  supported  in 
accessing appropriate healthcare and other rehabilitation support following 
attacks, gender-based violence and related problems (cid:15)see Essential health 
services (cid:182) control of communicable diseases standard (cid:26) on page (cid:26)1(cid:29) and 
Essential health services (cid:182) child health standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages (cid:26)(cid:25)1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:16).

8.  Where remedial assistance is available from non-governmental sources, 
people  should  be  helped  to  identify  and  access  such  assistance,  where 
appropriate.

42

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

Community-based and other psychosocial support

9.  Positive  communal  coping  mechanisms  such  as  culturally  appropriate 
burials,  religious  ceremonies  and  practices,  and  non-harmful  cultural  and 
social practices should be supported.

10.  Activities for children: Where appropriate, communities should be encour-
aged  to  organise  structured,  supportive  educational  and  protective  activi-
ties  for  children  through  non-formal  means  such  as  child-friendly  spaces. 
Community  protection  mechanisms  should  include  self-help  activities  that 
promote psychosocial well-being.

11.  Help  organise  appropriate  psychosocial  support  for  survivors  of 
violence. Ensure that survivors have access to community social networks 
and self-help activities. Access to community-based social support should 
be complemented by access to mental healthcare.

12.  Integrated  support  system:  Those  agencies  working  on  psychosocial 
support  and  mental  health  in  various  sectors  should  collaborate  to  build 
an  integrated  system  of  support  for  the  population  (see  Essential  health 
services (cid:182) mental health standard 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).

13.  Clinical support: Establish mechanisms for the referral of severely affected 

people for available clinical support.

43

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

References and  
further reading
General protection: Background and tools

Caritas  (cid:40)ustralia,  C(cid:40)RE  (cid:40)ustralia,  Oxfam  (cid:40)ustralia  and  World  (cid:61)ision 
(cid:40)ustralia (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), Minimum (cid:40)gency Standards for Incorporating Protection 
into Humanitarian Response (cid:182) Field Testing (cid:61)ersion. 
www.icva.ch/doc00002448.pdf
Giossi  Caver(cid:97)asio,  S  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16),  Strengthening  Protection  in  War  (cid:182)  (cid:40)  Search  for 
Professional  Standards.  Ref  (cid:23)7(cid:31)(cid:26).  International  Committee  of  the  Red  Cross 
(ICRC). Geneva.
Inter-(cid:40)gency Standing Committee (cid:15)I(cid:40)SC(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16), Growing the Sheltering Tree (cid:182) 
Protecting  Rights  through  Humanitarian  (cid:40)ction  (cid:182)  Programmes  (cid:13)  practices 
gathered from the (cid:196)eld. Geneva. www.icva.ch/gstree.pdf
I(cid:40)SC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Operational  Guidelines  and  Manual  for  the  Protection  of  Persons 
Affected by Natural Disasters.
ICRC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Enhancing  protection  for  civilians  in  armed  con(cid:197)ict  and  other 
situations of violence. Geneva. 
www.icrc.org(cid:22)eng(cid:22)resources(cid:22)documents(cid:22)publication(cid:22)p(cid:23)9(cid:28)(cid:29).htm
ICRC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Professional  standards  for  protection  work  carried  out  by 
humanitarian  and  human  rights  actors  in  armed  con(cid:197)ict  and  other  situations 
of  violence.  Geneva.  www.icrc.org/web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/htmlall/p0999  or  
www.unhcr.org(cid:22)refworld(cid:22)type,THEMG(cid:60)I(cid:43)E,,,(cid:27)b(cid:26)9cba(cid:28)(cid:25),(cid:23).html
O(cid:187)Callaghan,  S  and  Pantuliano,  S  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Incorporating  Civilian  Protection  into 
Humanitarian Response. HPG Report 26. Overseas Development Insitute (ODI). 
London.
Slim, H and (cid:41)onwick, (cid:40) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), Protection (cid:182) an (cid:40)LN(cid:40)P guide for humanitarian 
agencies. ODI. London. www.alnap.org/initiatives/protection.aspx
(cid:60)nited Nations Of(cid:196)ce for the Coordination of Humanitarian (cid:40)ffairs (cid:15)OCH(cid:40)(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), 
Aide Mémoire: For the Consideration of Issues Pertaining for the Protection of 
Civilians. New York. 
www.humansecuritygateway.com(cid:22)showRecord.php(cid:38)RecordId(cid:36)(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29)

44

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

Speciﬁc standards for protection

Children
ICRC,  International  Rescue  Committee,  Save  the  Children,  (cid:60)NICEF,  (cid:60)NHCR  and 
World (cid:61)ision (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16), Interagency Guiding Principles on (cid:60)naccompanied and Separated 
Children. Geneva. www.icrc.org(cid:22)eng(cid:22)assets(cid:22)(cid:196)les(cid:22)other(cid:22)icrc(cid:70)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:70)1(cid:23)11.pdf
(cid:60)NICEF  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Paris  Principles  and  Commitments  to  Protect  Children  from 
Unlawful recruitment or Use by Armed Forces or Groups. Paris. 
www.un.org(cid:22)children(cid:22)con(cid:197)ict(cid:22)english(cid:22)parisprinciples.html
(cid:60)N (cid:43)isarmament, (cid:43)emobili(cid:97)ation and Reintegration (cid:15)(cid:60)N-(cid:43)(cid:43)R(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Integrated 
(cid:43)isarmament,  (cid:43)emobilisation,  and  Reintegration  Standards.  New  (cid:64)ork.  
www.unddr.org(cid:22)iddrs(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23).php and www.unddr.org(cid:22)iddrs(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:26)(cid:23).php

Disabilities
Handicap International (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Protection (cid:182) Issues for People with (cid:43)isabilities and 
Injuries.
Handicap International (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), Toolkit on Protection of Persons with (cid:43)isabilities.

(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Guidelines 

Interventions 

for  Gender-(cid:41)ased  (cid:61)iolence 

Gender-based violence
I(cid:40)SC 
in 
Humanitarian Settings – Focusing on the Prevention of and Response to Sexual 
(cid:61)iolence  in  Emergencies.  Geneva.  www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/pageloader.
aspx(cid:38)page(cid:36)content-products-products(cid:13)productcatid(cid:36)(cid:26)
World Health Organi(cid:97)ation (cid:15)WHO(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Ethical and safety recommendations for 
researching, documenting and monitoring sexual violence in emergencies. Geneva. 
www.who.int(cid:22)gender(cid:22)documents(cid:22)violence(cid:22)97(cid:31)9(cid:25)(cid:27)1(cid:28)9(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:31)1(cid:22)en(cid:22)index.html

Housing, land and property rights
Principles  on  Housing  and  Property  Restitution  for  Refugees  and  Displaced 
Persons. E(cid:22)CN.(cid:27)(cid:22)S(cid:60)(cid:41).(cid:25)(cid:22)RES(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:25)1. (cid:184)Pinheiro Principles(cid:185). 
http:(cid:22)(cid:22)ap.ohchr.org(cid:22)documents(cid:22)alldocs.aspx(cid:38)doc(cid:70)id(cid:36)11(cid:29)(cid:27)(cid:27)
Global  Land  Tool  Network  and  Early  Recovery  Cluster  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Land  and 
natural  disasters  –  Guidance 
for  Practitioners.  UN  Human  Settlements 
Programme (UN-Habitat) and Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Nairobi.  
www.unhabitat.org(cid:22)pmss(cid:22)listItem(cid:43)etails.aspx(cid:38)publicationI(cid:43)(cid:36)(cid:25)97(cid:26)

45

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Global Protection Cluster, Housing, Land (cid:40)nd Property (cid:40)rea of Responsibility 
(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Checklist  of  Housing,  Land  and  Property  Rights  and  (cid:41)roader  Land 
Issues  Throughout  the  Displacement  Timeline  from  Emergency  to  Recovery. 
www.internal-displacement.org(cid:22)(cid:31)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:28)7(cid:23)(cid:31)F(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:41)E(cid:26)(cid:41)1(cid:22)(cid:15)httpInfoFiles(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:25)9(cid:31)C
(cid:26)C(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28)1(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:43)C1(cid:25)(cid:28)7(cid:29)E7(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:43)(cid:22)(cid:11)(cid:196)le(cid:22)HC(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)Checklist(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)on(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)HLP(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)
and(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)Land(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)Issues(cid:70)Final(cid:25).pdf
Internal  (cid:43)isplacement  Monitoring  Centre,  F(cid:40)O,  OCH(cid:40),  Of(cid:196)ce  of  the  (cid:60)N  High 
Commissioner  for  Human  Rights,  (cid:60)N-Habitat  and  (cid:60)NHCR  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Handbook 
on  Housing  and  Property  Restitution  for  Refugees  and  Displaced  Persons. 
Implementing the (cid:14)Pinheiro Principles(cid:14), I(cid:40)SC. Geneva. 
www.unhcr.org(cid:22)refworld(cid:22)docid(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:29)9(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:25)c(cid:25).html

Internally displaced persons
(cid:41)agshaw, S and Paul, (cid:43) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16), Protect or Neglect(cid:38) Towards a More Effective 
United Nations Approach to the Protection of Internally Displaced Persons – An 
Evaluation.  (cid:41)rookings-S(cid:40)IS  Project  on  Internal  (cid:43)isplacement  and  (cid:60)NOCH(cid:40), 
Interagency Internal Displacement Division. Washington DC. 
www.brookings.edu(cid:22)papers(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:22)11(cid:25)(cid:26)humanrights(cid:70)bagshaw.aspx
(cid:41)rookings Institution (cid:182) (cid:60)niversity of (cid:41)ern Project of Internal (cid:43)isplacement (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), 
Addressing  Internal  Displacement:  A  Framework  for  National  Responsibility. 
Washington (cid:43)C. www.brookings.edu(cid:22)projects(cid:22)idp(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:23)1(cid:70)nrframework.aspx
Global  Protection  Cluster  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Handbook  for  the  Protection  of  Internally 
Displaced Persons. www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4790cbc02.html
I(cid:40)SC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16), Implementing the Collaborative (cid:40)pproach to Situations of Internal 
Displacement  –  Guidance  for  UN  Humanitarian  and/or  Resident  Coordinators. 
www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/pageloader.aspx?page=content-products- 
products(cid:13)productcatid(cid:36)1(cid:23)
I(cid:40)SC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), Framework on (cid:43)urable Solutions for Internally (cid:43)isplaced Persons. 
www.brookings.edu(cid:22)reports(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:70)internal(cid:70)displacement.aspx
(cid:60)N  Economic  and  Social  Council  (cid:15)199(cid:31)(cid:16),  (cid:60)N  Guiding  Principles  on  Internal 
(cid:43)isplacement.  E(cid:22)CN.(cid:27)(cid:22)199(cid:31)(cid:22)(cid:28)(cid:26)(cid:22)(cid:40)dd.(cid:25).  www.idpguidingprinciples.org/ 
or  
www.unhchr.ch(cid:22)Huridocda(cid:22)Huridoca.nsf(cid:22)TestFrame(cid:22)d(cid:25)e(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)c(cid:29)1b7(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26)ec1(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:29)
1e(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:29)f(cid:26)(cid:29)e(cid:38)Opendocument

Mental health and psychosocial support
I(cid:40)SC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  I(cid:40)SC  Guidelines  on  Mental  Health  and  Psychosocial  Support.  
www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/pageloaderaspx?page=content-products- 
default

46

P r o t e c t i o n   P r i n c i p l e s

I(cid:40)SC Reference Group on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), Mental 
Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) In Humanitarian Emergencies: What 
Should Protection Programme Managers (cid:50)now. 
www.psychosocialnetwork.net/explore/tags/mhpss/

Mine action
The International Mine Action Standards: 
www.mineactionstandards.org/imas.htm#english

Older people
I(cid:40)SC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Humanitarian  (cid:40)ction  and  Older  Persons  (cid:182)  (cid:40)n  essential  brief  for 
humanitarian  actors.  WHO–HelpAge  International.  www.humanitarianinfo.org/
iasc(cid:22)pageloader.aspx(cid:38)page(cid:36)content-products-products(cid:13)productcatid(cid:36)(cid:25)(cid:27) 

47

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

48
48

The  
Core Standards

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

How to use this chapter

The Core Standards are essential process standards shared by all sectors. 
They provide a single reference point for approaches that underpin all the 
standards in the Handbook. Each chapter, therefore, requires the companion 
use of the Core Standards to help attain its own standards.

There are six Core Standards:

People-centred humanitarian response
Coordination and collaboration
Assessment
Design and response
Performance, transparency and learning
Aid worker performance

Each Core Standard is structured as follows:

 

 

 

 

The Core Standard: It is qualitative in nature and speciﬁes the level to be attained in humani-
tarian response.

Key actions: These are suggested activities and inputs to help meet the standards.

Key indicators: These are ‘signals’ that show whether a standard has been attained. They 
provide a way of measuring and communicating the processes and results of key actions; they 
relate to the minimum standard, not to the key action.

Guidance notes: These include speciﬁc points to consider when applying the Core Standard, 
key actions and key indicators in different situations. They provide guidance on tackling prac-
tical difﬁculties, benchmarks or advice on priority issues. They may also include critical issues 
relating to the standards, actions or indicators, and describe dilemmas, controversies or gaps 
in current knowledge.

The key indicators of the Core Standards accommodate wide variations in a user’s application and 
context. Measurable and time-bound speciﬁcations for each indicator are highly context- and sector-
speciﬁc. Users should therefore adapt the key indicators to their particular situation, as appropriate.

A select list of references and further reading is included at the end of this chapter.

50

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

Contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

The Core Standards  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

References and further reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  74

51

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Humanitarian 

Charter

Protection 
Principles

Core Standards

Standard 1
People-
centred 
humanitarian 
response

Standard 2
Coordination  
and 
collaboration

Standard 3
Assessment

Standard 4
Design  
and 
response

Standard 5
Performance, 
transparency 
and learning

Standard 6
Aid worker 
performance

References and further reading

52

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

Introduction

The Core Standards describe processes that are essential to achieving all the 
Sphere minimum standards. They are a practical expression of the principles of 
the Sphere Humanitarian Charter and are fundamental to the rights of people 
affected by con(cid:197)ict or disaster to assistance that supports life with dignity. The 
Core Standards de(cid:196)ne the minimum level of response to be attained (cid:15)as signalled 
by  the  key  indicators(cid:16)  by  humanitarian  agencies,  be  they  community-based, 
local, national or international.

The  Core  Standards  are  also  linked  to  other  key  accountability  initiatives, 
promoting coherence and reinforcing a shared commitment to accountability. 
For example, the Humanitarian (cid:40)ccountability Partnership (cid:15)H(cid:40)P(cid:16) (cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23) Standard 
in (cid:40)ccountability and (cid:56)uality Management benchmarks and the Core Standards 
contain  complementary  requirements.  The  aid  worker  performance  standard 
is  coherent  with  People  In  Aid’s  Code  of  Good  Practice.  The  Good  Enough 
Guide of the Emergency Capacity (cid:41)uilding (cid:15)EC(cid:41)(cid:16) Project, Groupe (cid:60)R(cid:43)(cid:187)s Quality 
Compas and the Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance 
in Humanitarian (cid:40)ction (cid:15)(cid:40)LN(cid:40)P(cid:16) inform Core Standards 1 and (cid:28) in particular. 
The Core Standards are a companion to the Foundational Standards in the INEE 
(Inter-Agency  Network  for  Education  in  Emergencies)  Minimum  Standards  for 
Education: Preparedness, Response, Recovery.

The importance of the Core Standards for all sectors

The  (cid:196)rst  Core  Standard  recognises  that  the  participation  of  disaster-affected 
people (cid:182) women, men, girls and boys of all ages (cid:182) and their capacity and strate-
gies to survive with dignity are integral to humanitarian response. Core Standard 
2  addresses  the  need  for  an  effective  response  to  be  coordinated  and  imple-
mented with other agencies and governmental authorities engaged in impartial 
humanitarian action.

Core Standard (cid:26) describes the need for assessments systematically to under-
stand the nature of the disaster, identify who has been affected and how, and 
assess people’s vulnerability and capacities. It acknowledges the critical impor-
tance of understanding need in relation to the political, social, economic and envi-
ronmental context and the wider population. Agencies meeting Core Standard 4 

53

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

design their response based on an impartial assessment of needs, addressing 
unmet needs in relation to the context and capacity of affected people and states 
to meet their own needs.

Core Standard (cid:28) is attained by agencies that continually examine the effective-
ness, (cid:88)uality and appropriateness of their response. (cid:40)gencies adapt their strat-
egies  in  accordance  with  monitoring  information  and  feedback  from  people 
affected by disaster, and share information about their performance. They invest 
in unbiased reviews and evaluations and use the (cid:196)ndings to improve their policy 
and practice.

Core  Standard  6  recognises  that  humanitarian  agencies  have  an  obligation  to 
disaster-affected people to employ aid workers with the appropriate knowledge, 
skills,  behaviour  and  attitudes  to  deliver  an  effective  humanitarian  response. 
E(cid:88)ually, agencies are responsible for enabling aid workers to perform satisfacto-
rily through effective management and support for their emotional and physical 
well-being.

Vulnerability

Sphere’s  focus  is  on  meeting  the  urgent  survival  needs  of  people  affected  by 
disaster  or  con(cid:197)ict.  However,  the  Core  Standards  can  also  support  disaster 
preparedness and approaches that reduce future risk and vulnerability, enhance 
capacity  and  promote  early  recovery.  Such  approaches  take  account  of  the 
impact of the response on the natural environment and broader context and are 
highly relevant to the needs of the host and wider population.

Throughout  the  Handbook,  (cid:186)vulnerable(cid:187)  refers  to  people  who  are  especially 
susceptible to the effects of natural or man-made disasters or of con(cid:197)ict. People 
are, or become, more vulnerable to disasters due to a combination of physical, 
social,  environmental  and  political  factors.  They  may  be  marginalised  by  their 
society due to their ethnicity, age, sex, disability, class or caste, political af(cid:196)lia-
tions or religion. A combination of vulnerabilities and the effect of an often volatile 
context  all  contribute  to  people  being  vulnerable  for  different  reasons  and  in 
different ways. (cid:61)ulnerable people, like all those affected by disaster, have various 
capacities  to  manage  and  recover  from  disasters.  A  thorough  understanding 
of  vulnerable  people’s  capacities  and  the  barriers  they  may  face  in  accessing 
humanitarian support is essential for a response that meets the needs of those 
who need it most.

54

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

The Core Standards

Core Standard 1: People-centred humanitarian response

People’s capacity and strategies to survive with dignity are integral 
to the design and approach of humanitarian response.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Support local capacity by identifying community groups and social networks 
at the earliest opportunity and build on community-based and self-help initia-
tives (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

Establish  systematic  and  transparent  mechanisms  through  which  people 
affected by disaster or con(cid:197)ict can provide regular feedback and in(cid:197)uence 
programmes (see guidance note 2).

Ensure a balanced representation of vulnerable people in discussions with 
the disaster-affected population (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Provide  information  to  the  affected  population  about  the  humanitarian 
agency, its project(cid:15)s(cid:16) and people(cid:187)s entitlements in an accessible format and 
language (see guidance note 4).

Provide the affected population with access to safe and appropriate spaces 
for community meetings and information-sharing at the earliest opportunity 
(cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Enable people to lodge complaints about the programme easily and safely 
and  establish  transparent,  timely  procedures  for  response  and  remedial 
actions (see guidance note 6).

 » Wherever  feasible,  use  local  labour,  environmentally  sustainable  mate-
rials and socially responsible businesses to bene(cid:196)t the local economy and 
promote recovery.

 » (cid:43)esign  projects,  wherever  possible,  to  accommodate  and  respect  helpful 
cultural,  spiritual  and  traditional  practices  regarded  as  important  by  local 
people (see guidance note 7).

55

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

Progressively  increase  disaster-affected  people’s  decision-making  power 
and ownership of programmes during the course of a response.

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Project  strategies  are  explicitly  linked  to  community-based  capacities  and 
initiatives.

 » Disaster-affected people conduct or actively participate in regular meetings 

on how to organise and implement the response (see guidance notes 1–2).

 »

 »

The number of self-help initiatives led by the affected community and local 
authorities increases during the response period (see guidance note 1).

(cid:40)gencies  have  investigated  and,  as  appropriate,  acted  upon  complaints 
received about the assistance provided.

Guidance notes
1.  Local capacity: (cid:43)isaster-affected people possess and ac(cid:88)uire skills, knowl-
edge and capacities to cope with, respond to and recover from disasters. 
Active  participation  in  humanitarian  response  is  an  essential  foundation  of 
people(cid:187)s right to life with dignity af(cid:196)rmed in Principles (cid:29) and 7 of the Code 
of  Conduct  for  the  International  Red  Cross  and  Red  Crescent  Movement 
and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) in Disaster Relief (see Annex 2 
on page (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:31)(cid:16). Self-help and community-led initiatives contribute to psycho-
logical and social well-being through restoring dignity and a degree of control 
to  disaster-affected  populations.  (cid:40)ccess  to  social,  (cid:196)nancial,  cultural  and 
emotional support through extended family, religious networks and rituals, 
friends, schools and community activities helps to re-establish individual and 
community  self-respect  and  identity,  decrease  vulnerability  and  enhance 
resilience.  Local  people  should  be  supported  to  identify  and,  if  appro-
priate,  reactivate  or  establish  supportive  networks  and  self-help  groups.  
The extent to which people participate, and how they do so, will be deter-
mined by how recently the disaster occurred and by the physical, social and 
political  circumstances.  Indicators  signalling  participation  should,  there-
fore, be selected according to context and represent all those affected. The 
local population is usually the (cid:196)rst to react in a disaster and even early in a 
response some degree of participation is always feasible. Explicit efforts to 
listen to, consult and engage people at an early stage will increase (cid:88)uality 
and community management later in the programme.

2.  Feedback  mechanisms  provide  a  means  for  all  those  affected  to  in(cid:197)u-
ence  programme  planning  and  implementation  (see  HAP’s  ‘participation’ 
benchmark(cid:16).  They  include  focus  group  discussions,  surveys,  interviews 
and  meetings  on  ‘lessons  learnt’  with  a  representative  sample  of  all  the 

56

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

affected population (see ECB’s Good Enough Guide for tools and guidance 
notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27)(cid:16). The (cid:196)ndings and the agency(cid:187)s actions in response to feedback 
should be systematically shared with the affected population.

3.  Representative participation: Understanding and addressing the barriers 
to  participation  faced  by  different  people  is  critical  to  balanced  participa-
tion. Measures should be taken to ensure the participation of members of all 
groups of affected people (cid:182) young and old, men and women. Special efforts 
should be made to include people who are not well represented, are margin-
alised (e.g. by ethnicity or religion) or otherwise ‘invisible’ (e.g. housebound or 
in an institution). The participation of youth and children should be promoted 
so far as it is in their own best interest and measures taken to ensure that 
they are not exposed to abuse or harm.

4.  Sharing information: People have a right to accurate and updated informa-
tion about actions taken on their behalf. Information can reduce anxiety and 
is an essential foundation of community responsibility and ownership. At a 
minimum, agencies should provide a description of the agency(cid:187)s mandate 
and project(cid:15)s(cid:16), the population(cid:187)s entitlements and rights, and when and where 
to access assistance (see HAP’s ‘sharing information’ benchmark). Common 
ways of sharing information include noticeboards, public meetings, schools, 
newspapers  and  radio  broadcasts.  The  information  should  demonstrate 
considered understanding of people’s situations and be conveyed in local 
language(cid:15)s(cid:16), using a variety of adapted media so that it is accessible to all 
those  concerned.  For  example,  use  spoken  communications  or  pictures 
for children and adults who cannot read, use uncomplicated language (cid:15)i.e. 
understandable  to  local  12-year-olds)  and  employ  a  large  typeface  when 
printing information for people with visual impairments. Manage meetings so 
that older people or those with hearing dif(cid:196)culties can hear.

5.  Safe and accessible spaces: Locate public meeting places in secure areas 
and  ensure  they  are  accessible  to  those  with  restricted  mobility  including 
to women whose attendance at public events is limited by cultural norms. 
Provide child-friendly spaces for children to play, learn, socialise and develop.

6.  Complaints:  People  have  the  right  to  complain  to  an  agency  and  seek  a 
corresponding  response  (see  HAP’s  ‘handling  complaints’  benchmark). 
Formal mechanisms for complaints and redress are an essential component 
of an agency’s accountability to people and help populations to re-establish 
control over their lives.

7.  Culturally  appropriate  practices,  such  as  burials  and  religious  ceremo-
nies and practices, are often an essential element of people(cid:187)s identity, dignity 
and capacity to recover from disaster. Some culturally acceptable practices 

57

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

violate  people’s  human  rights  (e.g.  denial  of  education  to  girls  and  female 
genital mutilation) and should not be supported.

Core Standard 2: Coordination and collaboration

Humanitarian response is planned and implemented in coordination 
with the relevant authorities, humanitarian agencies and civil society 
organisations  engaged  in  impartial  humanitarian  action,  working 
together for maximum ef(cid:196)ciency, coverage and effectiveness.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Participate in general and any applicable sectoral coordination mechanisms 
from the outset (see guidance notes 1–2).

 »

 »

 »

(cid:41)e informed of the responsibilities, objectives and coordination role of the 
state and other coordination groups where present (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Provide coordination groups with information about the agency(cid:187)s mandate, 
objectives and programme.

Share  assessment  information  with  the  relevant  coordination  groups  in  a 
timely manner and in a format that can be readily used by other humanitarian 
agencies (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1(cid:16).

 » Use  programme  information  from  other  humanitarian  agencies  to  inform 

analysis, selection of geographical area and response plans.

 »

Regularly  update  coordination  groups  on  progress,  reporting  any  major 
delays, agency shortages or spare capacity (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:27)(cid:16).

 » Collaborate  with  other  humanitarian  agencies  to  strengthen  advocacy  on 

critical shared humanitarian concerns.

 »

Establish  clear  policies  and  practice  regarding  the  agency’s  engagement 
with non-humanitarian actors, based on humanitarian principles and objec-
tives (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Assessment reports and information about programme plans and progress 
are  regularly  submitted  to  the  relevant  coordinating  groups  (see  guidance 
note 4).

 »

The  humanitarian  activities  of  other  agencies  in  the  same  geographical  or 
sectoral areas are not duplicated.

58

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

 » Commitments made at coordination meetings are acted upon and reported 

in a timely manner.

 »

The agency’s response takes account of the capacity and strategies of other 
humanitarian agencies, civil society organisations and relevant authorities.

Guidance notes
1.  Coordinated responses: (cid:40)de(cid:88)uate programme coverage, timeliness and 
quality  require  collective  action.  Active  participation  in  coordination  efforts 
enables  coordination  leaders  to  establish  a  timely,  clear  division  of  labour 
and  responsibility,  gauge  the  extent  to  which  needs  are  being  collectively 
met,  reduce  duplication  and  address  gaps  in  coverage  and  (cid:88)uality.  Coor-
dinated  responses,  timely  inter-agency  assessments  and  information- 
sharing  reduce  the  burden  on  affected  people  who  may  be  subjected  to 
demands  for  the  same  information  from  a  series  of  assessment  teams. 
Collaboration and, where possible, the sharing of resources and e(cid:88)uipment 
optimise the capacity of communities, their neighbours, host governments, 
donors and humanitarian agencies with different mandates and expertise. 
Participation in coordination mechanisms prior to a disaster establishes rela-
tionships and enhances coordination during a response. Local civil society 
organisations  and  authorities  may  not  participate  if  coordination  mecha-
nisms appear to be relevant only to international agencies. Respect the use 
of  the  local  language(s)  in  meetings  and  in  other  shared  communications. 
Identify local civil society actors and networks involved in the response and 
encourage them and other local and international humanitarian agencies to 
participate. Staff representing agencies in coordination meetings should have 
the appropriate information, skills and authority to contribute to planning and 
decision-making.

2.  Common  coordination  mechanisms  include  meetings  –  general  (for 
all  programmes(cid:16),  sectoral  (cid:15)such  as  health(cid:16)  and  cross-sectoral  (cid:15)such 
as  gender)  –  and  information-sharing  mechanisms  (such  as  data-
bases  of  assessment  and  contextual  information).  Meetings  which 
bring  together  different  sectors  can  further  enable  people’s  needs  to 
be  addressed  as  a  whole,  rather  than  in  isolation  (cid:15)e.g.  people(cid:187)s  shelter, 
water,  sanitation,  hygiene  and  psychosocial  needs  are  interrelated(cid:16). 
Relevant  information  should  be  shared  between  different  coordination 
mechanisms  to  ensure  integrated  coordination  across  all  programmes. 
In all coordination contexts, the commitment of agencies to participate will 
be  affected  by  the  quality  of  the  coordination  mechanisms:  coordination 
leaders have a responsibility to ensure that meetings and information are 
well managed, ef(cid:196)cient and results-orientated. If not, participating agencies 
should advocate for, and support, improved mechanisms.

59

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

3.  Coordination roles: It is the affected state’s role to coordinate the humani-
tarian  response  of  assisting  organisations.  Humanitarian  agencies  have 
an  essential  role  to  play  by  supporting  the  state’s  coordination  function. 
However,  in  some  contexts,  alternative  coordination  mechanisms  may  be 
appropriate if, for example, state authorities are themselves responsible for 
abuse and violations or their assistance is not impartial or if the state is willing 
to play a coordination role, but lacks capacity. In these situations coordina-
tion meetings may be separately or jointly led by the local authorities with the 
United  Nations  or  NGOs.  Many  large-scale  humanitarian  emergencies  are 
now typically coordinated through the (cid:186)cluster approach(cid:187), with groupings of 
agencies working in the same sector under a lead agency.

4.  Efﬁcient  data-sharing  will  be  enhanced  if  the  information  is  easy  to  use 
(cid:15)clear,  relevant,  brief(cid:16)  and  follows  global  humanitarian  protocols  which  are 
technically compatible with other agencies(cid:187) data (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:26) on 
page (cid:29)1(cid:16). The exact fre(cid:88)uency of data-sharing is agency- and context-speci(cid:196)c 
but should be prompt to remain relevant. Sensitive information should remain 
con(cid:196)dential (cid:15)see Core Standards (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27) on pages (cid:29)1(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:16).

5.  Military  and  private  sector:  The  private  sector  and  foreign  and  national 
military are increasingly part of the relief effort and therefore affect coordina-
tion efforts. The military bring particular expertise and resources, including 
security, logistics, transport and communication. However, their activities can 
blur the important distinction between humanitarian objectives and military 
or  political  agendas  and  create  future  security  risks.  Any  association  with 
the military should be in the service of, and led by, humanitarian agencies 
according to endorsed guidelines. Some agencies will maintain a minimum 
dialogue to ensure operational ef(cid:196)ciency (cid:15)e.g. basic programme information-
sharing) while others may establish stronger links (e.g. use of military assets). 
In  all  cases,  humanitarian  agencies  must  remain  clearly  distinct  from  the 
military to avoid any real or perceived association with a political or military 
agenda  that  could  compromise  the  agencies(cid:187)  independence,  credibility, 
security  and  access  to  affected  populations.  The  private  sector  can  bring 
commercial ef(cid:196)ciencies, complementary expertise and resources to humani-
tarian agencies. Information-sharing is required to avoid duplication and to 
promote  humanitarian  good  practice.  Private–humanitarian  partnerships 
must strictly be for the bene(cid:196)t of humanitarian objectives.

60

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

Core Standard 3: Assessment

The priority needs of the disaster-affected population are identi(cid:196)ed 
through  a  systematic  assessment  of  the  context,  risks  to  life  with 
dignity and the capacity of the affected people and relevant authori-
ties to respond.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Find and use pre-disaster information about local humanitarian capacity, the 
affected  and  wider  population,  context  and  other  pre-existing  factors  that 
may increase people’s susceptibility to the disaster (see guidance note 1).

 » Carry out an initial assessment immediately, building on pre-disaster infor-
mation to assess changes in the context caused by the disaster, identifying 
any new factors that create or increase vulnerability (see guidance note 2).

 » Carry out a rapid assessment as soon as possible, following up with subse-
quent in-depth assessments as time and the situation allow (see guidance 
note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 » (cid:43)isaggregate population data by, at the very least, sex and age (cid:15)see guidance 

note 4).

 »

Listen to an inclusive range of people in the assessment – women and men 
of all ages, girls, boys and other vulnerable people affected by the disaster as 
well as the wider population (cid:15)see Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28) and guidance 
notes (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

 »

Participate  in  multisectoral,  joint  or  inter-agency  assessments  wherever 
possible.

 » Gather information systematically, using a variety of methods, triangulate with 
information gathered from a number of sources and agencies and document 
the data as they are collected (see guidance note 7).

 »

 »

 »

 »

(cid:40)ssess the coping capacity, skills, resources and recovery strategies of the 
affected people (see guidance note 8).

Assess the response plans and capacity of the state.

Assess  the  impact  of  the  disaster  on  the  psychosocial  well-being  of  indi-
viduals and communities.

Assess current and potential safety concerns for the disaster-affected popu-
lation and aid workers, including the potential for the response to exacerbate 

61

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

a con(cid:197)ict or create tension between the affected and host populations (cid:15)see 
guidance note 9).

 »

Share  assessment  data  in  a  timely  manner  and  in  a  format  that  is  acces-
sible to other humanitarian agencies (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:25) on page (cid:28)(cid:31) and 
guidance note 10).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Assessed needs have been explicitly linked to the capacity of affected people 
and the state to respond.

 »

 »

 »

Rapid and in-depth assessment reports contain views that are representa-
tive of all affected people, including members of vulnerable groups and those 
of the surrounding population.

(cid:40)ssessment  reports  contain  data  disaggregated  by,  at  the  very  least,  sex 
and age.

In-depth  assessment  reports  contain  information  and  analysis  of  vulnera-
bility, context and capacity.

 » Where assessment formats have been agreed and widely supported, they 

have been used.

 »

Rapid  assessments  have  been  followed  by  in-depth  assessments  of  the 
populations selected for intervention.

Guidance notes
1.  Pre-disaster information: A collaborative pooling of existing information is 
invaluable for initial and rapid assessments. A considerable amount of infor-
mation  is  almost  always  available  about  the  context  (cid:15)e.g.  political,  social, 
economic, security, con(cid:197)ict and natural environment(cid:16) and the people (cid:15)such 
as their sex, age, health, culture, spirituality and education(cid:16). Sources of this 
information include the relevant state ministries (cid:15)e.g. health and census data(cid:16), 
academic or research institutions, community-based organisations and local 
and international humanitarian agencies present before the disaster. Disaster 
preparedness  and  early  warning  initiatives,  new  developments  in  shared 
web-based mapping, crowd-sourcing and mobile phone platforms (cid:15)such as 
Ushahidi) have also generated databases of relevant information.

2. 

Initial  assessments,  typically  carried  out  in  the  (cid:196)rst  hours  following  a 
disaster, may be based almost entirely on second-hand information and pre-
existing data. They are essential to inform immediate relief needs and should 
be carried out and shared immediately.

62

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

3.  Phased assessments: (cid:40)ssessment is a process, not a single event. Initial 
and rapid assessments provide the basis for subsequent in-depth assess-
ments  that  deepen  (cid:15)but  do  not  repeat(cid:16)  earlier  assessment  (cid:196)ndings.  Care 
should be taken as repeated assessments of sensitive protection concerns 
such  as  gender-based  violence  can  be  more  harmful  than  bene(cid:196)cial  to 
communities and individuals.

4.  Data disaggregation: Detailed disaggregation is rarely possible initially but 
is of critical importance to identify the different needs and rights of children 
and adults of all ages. (cid:40)t the earliest opportunity, further disaggregate by sex 
and age for children (cid:23)(cid:182)(cid:28) male(cid:22)female, (cid:29)(cid:182)1(cid:25) male(cid:22)female and 1(cid:26)(cid:182)17 male(cid:22)
female, and then in 1(cid:23)-year age brackets, e.g. (cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:182)(cid:28)9, male(cid:22)female; (cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:182)(cid:29)9, 
male(cid:22)female; 7(cid:23)(cid:182)79, male(cid:22)female; (cid:31)(cid:23)(cid:18), male(cid:22)female. (cid:60)nlike the physiologi-
cally-related age groupings in the health chapter, these groupings address 
age-related differences linked to a range of rights, social and cultural issues.

5.  Representative  assessments:  Needs-based  assessments  cover  all 
disaster-affected populations. Special efforts are needed to assess people 
in  hard-to-reach  locations,  e.g.  people  who  are  not  in  camps,  are  in  less 
accessible  geographical  areas  or  in  host  families.  The  same  applies  for 
people less easily accessed but often at risk, such as persons with disabili-
ties,  older  people,  housebound  individuals,  children  and  youths,  who 
may  be  targeted  as  child  soldiers  or  subjected  to  gender-based  violence. 
Sources  of  primary  information  include  direct  observation,  focus  group 
discussions,  surveys  and  discussions  with  as  wide  a  range  of  people 
and  groups  as  possible  (cid:15)e.g.  local  authorities,  male  and  female  commu-
nity  leaders,  older  men  and  women,  health  staff,  teachers  and  other 
educational  personnel, 
traders  and  other  humanitarian  agencies(cid:16). 
Speaking openly may be dif(cid:196)cult or dangerous for some people. Talk with 
children separately as they are unlikely to speak in front of adults and doing 
so may put the children at risk. In most cases, women and girls should be 
consulted  in  separate  spaces.  Aid  workers  engaged  in  the  collection  of 
systematic information from people who have been abused or violated should 
have  the  necessary  skills  and  systems  to  do  so  safely  and  appropriately. 
In con(cid:197)ict areas, information could be misused and place people at further 
risk or compromise an agency’s ability to operate. Only with an individual’s 
consent  may  information  about  them  be  shared  with  other  humanitarian 
agencies or relevant organisations (cid:15)see Protection Principle 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16). 
It will not be possible to immediately assess all those affected: excluded areas 
or groups should be clearly noted in the assessment report and returned to 
at the earliest opportunity.

6.  Assessing vulnerability: The risks faced by people following a disaster will 
vary  for  different  groups  and  individuals.  Some  people  may  be  vulnerable 

63

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

due to individual factors such as their age (particularly the very young and 
the very old(cid:16) and illness (cid:15)especially people living with HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S(cid:16). (cid:41)ut indi-
vidual factors alone do not automatically increase risk. Assess the social and 
contextual factors that contribute to vulnerability, such as discrimination and 
marginalisation (cid:15)e.g. low status and power of women and girls(cid:16); social isolation; 
environmental degradation; climate variability; poverty; lack of land tenure; 
poor governance; ethnicity; class or caste; and religious or political af(cid:196)liations. 
Subse(cid:88)uent in-depth assessments should identify potential future ha(cid:97)ards, 
such as changing risk patterns due to environmental degradation (e.g. soil 
erosion  or  deforestation(cid:16)  and  climate  change  and  geology  (cid:15)e.g.  cyclones, 
(cid:197)oods, droughts, landslides and sea-level rise(cid:16).

7.  Data-gathering  and  checklists:  Assessment 

information 

including 
population  movements  and  numbers  should  be  cross-checked,  vali-
dated  and  referenced  to  as  many  sources  as  possible.  If  multisectoral 
assessments  are  not  initially  possible,  pay  extra  attention  to  linkages 
with  other  individual  sector,  protection  and  cross-cutting  assessments. 
Data  sources  and  levels  of  disaggregation  should  be  noted  and  mortality 
and  morbidity  of  children  under  (cid:28)  years  old  documented  from  the  outset. 
Many  assessment  checklists  are  available,  based  on  agreed  humanitarian 
standards (see the checklists in the appendices of some technical chapters). 
Checklists enhance the coherence and accessibility of data to other agencies, 
ensure that all key areas have been examined and reduce organisational or 
individual bias. A common inter-agency assessment format may have been 
developed  prior  to  a  disaster  or  agreed  during  the  response.  In  all  cases, 
assessments  should  clarify  the  objectives  and  methodology  to  be  used 
and generate impartial information about the impact of the crisis on those 
affected.  A  mix  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  methods  appropriate  to  the 
context should be used. (cid:40)ssessment teams should, as far as possible, be 
composed of a mix of women and men, generalists and specialists, including 
those with skills in collecting gender-sensitive data and communicating with 
children.  Teams  should  include  people  familiar  with  the  language(s)  and 
location and able to communicate with people in culturally acceptable ways.

8.  Assessing capacities: Communities have capacities for coping and recovery 
(cid:15)see Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16). Many coping mechanisms are sustainable 
and helpful, while others may be negative, with potentially long-term harmful 
conse(cid:88)uences, such as the sale of assets or heavy alcohol consumption. 
Assessments should identify the positive strategies that increase resilience 
as well as the reasons for negative strategies.

9.  Assessing security: An assessment of the safety and security of disaster-
affected and host populations should be carried out in all initial and subse-
(cid:88)uent assessments, identifying threats of violence and any forms of coercion 

64

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

and denial of subsistence or basic human rights (cid:15)see Protection Principle (cid:26) 
on page (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:16).

10.  Sharing assessments: Assessment reports provide invaluable information 
to other humanitarian agencies, create baseline data and increase the trans-
parency of response decisions. Regardless of variations in individual agency 
design, assessment reports should be clear and concise, enable users to 
identify priorities for action and describe their methodology to demonstrate 
the reliability of data and enable a comparative analysis if required.

Core Standard 4: Design and response

The  humanitarian  response  meets  the  assessed  needs  of  the 
disaster-affected  population  in  relation  to  context,  the  risks  faced 
and  the  capacity  of  the  affected  people  and  state  to  cope  and 
recover.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » (cid:43)esign the programme based on an impartial assessment of needs, context, 
the  risks  faced  and  the  capacity  of  the  affected  population  (see  Core 
Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1(cid:16).

 » Design the programme to meet needs that cannot or will not be met by the 

state or the affected people (see guidance note 1).

 »

Prioritise life-saving actions that address basic, urgent survival needs in the 
immediate aftermath of a disaster.

 » (cid:60)sing  disaggregated  assessment  data,  analyse  the  ways  in  which  the 
disaster has affected different individuals and populations, and design the 
programme to meet their particular needs.

 » Design the response so that vulnerable people have full access to assistance 

and protection services (see guidance note 2).

 »

 »

Ensure that the programme design and approach supports all aspects of the 
dignity of the affected individuals and populations (see Core Standard 1 on 
page (cid:28)(cid:28) and guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

(cid:40)nalyse all contextual factors that increase people(cid:187)s vulnerability, designing 
the programme to progressively reduce their vulnerability (see Core Standard 
(cid:26) on page (cid:29)1 and guidance note (cid:27)(cid:16).

 » (cid:43)esign the programme to minimise the risk of endangering people, worsen 
the dynamics of a con(cid:197)ict or create insecurity or opportunities for exploita-
tion and abuse (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28) and Protection Principle 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).

65

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

Progressively close the gap between assessed conditions and the Sphere 
minimum standards, meeting or exceeding Sphere indicators (cid:15)see guidance 
note 6).

 » (cid:43)esign programmes that promote early recovery, reduce risk and enhance 
the capacity of affected people to prevent, minimise or better cope with the 
effects of future hazards (see guidance note 7).

 » Continually adapt the programme to maintain relevance and appropriateness 

(cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:28) on page (cid:29)(cid:31)(cid:16).

 »

Enhance sustained recovery by planning for and communicating exit strat-
egies  with  the  affected  population  during  the  early  stages  of  programme 
implementation.

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Programme design is based on an analysis of the speci(cid:196)c needs and risks 
faced by different groups of people.

 »

 »

 »

Programme  design  addresses  the  gap  between  people’s  needs  and  their 
own, or the state(cid:187)s, capacity to meet them.

Programme designs are revised to re(cid:197)ect changes in the context, risks and 
people’s needs and capacities.

Programme design includes actions to reduce people’s vulnerability to future 
hazards and increase their capacity to manage and cope with them.

Guidance notes
1.  Supporting  existing  capacity:  It  is  the  primary  role  and  responsibility  of 
the state to provide timely assistance and protection to those affected (see 
Humanitarian  Charter,  paragraph  (cid:25)  on  page  (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:16).  Intervene  if  the  affected 
population  and(cid:22)or  state  does  not  have  suf(cid:196)cient  capacity  to  respond 
(particularly  early  in  the  response)  or  if  the  state  or  controlling  authorities 
actively discriminate against certain groups of people and/or affected areas. 
In all cases the capacity and intentions of the state towards all members of 
the affected population inform the scale and type of humanitarian response.

2.  Access: Assistance is provided to those in need without discrimination (see 
Protection Principle (cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16). People’s access to aid and their ability to 
use and bene(cid:196)t from assistance is increased through the provision of timely 
information and through design that corresponds with their particular needs 
and cultural and safety considerations (cid:15)for example, separate (cid:88)ueues for older 
people or women with children attending food distributions). It is enhanced 
by the participation of women, men, girls and boys of all ages in the design. 

66

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

Access is increased through the use of carefully designed targeting criteria 
and processes that are widely communicated, understood by the community 
and  systematically  monitored.  Actions  described  in  the  technical  chapters 
facilitate e(cid:88)ual access through considered design, such as locating facilities 
in areas that are safe, etc.

3.  The  foundation  of  life  with  dignity  is  the  assurance  of  access  to  basic 
services, security and respect for human rights (cid:15)see Humanitarian Charter on 
page 19(cid:16). E(cid:88)ually, the way in which humanitarian response is implemented 
strongly affects the dignity and well-being of the disaster-affected population. 
Programme approaches that respect the intrinsic value of each individual, 
support  their  religious  and  cultural  identity,  promote  community-based 
self-help  and  encourage  positive  social  support  networks  all  contribute  to 
psychosocial well-being and are an essential element of people’s right to life 
with dignity.

4.  Context and vulnerability: Social, political, cultural, economic, con(cid:197)ict and 
natural  environment  factors  can  increase  people’s  susceptibility  to  disas-
ters; changes in the context can create newly vulnerable people (cid:15)see Core 
Standard (cid:26) on page  (cid:29)1(cid:16). (cid:61)ulnerable people may face a number of factors 
simultaneously (cid:15)for example, older people who are members of marginalised 
ethnic groups). The interplay of personal and contextual factors that heighten 
risk should be analysed and programmes should be designed to address 
and mitigate those risks and target the needs of vulnerable people.

5.  Conﬂict sensitivity: Humanitarian assistance can have unintended negative 
impacts.  (cid:61)aluable  aid  resources  can  increase  exploitation  and  abuse  and 
lead  to  competition,  misuse  or  misappropriation  of  aid.  Famine  can  be  a 
weapon of war (e.g. deliberately depopulating an area or forcing asset trans-
fers).  Aid  can  negatively  affect  the  wider  population  and  amplify  unequal 
power  relations  between  different  groups,  including  men  and  women. 
Careful  analysis  and  design  can  reduce  the  potential  for  assistance  to 
increase con(cid:197)ict and insecurity (cid:15)including during natural disasters(cid:16). (cid:43)esign 
to  ensure  equitable  distribution  and  the  impartial  targeting  of  assistance. 
Protect people(cid:187)s safety and dignity by respecting con(cid:196)dential personal infor-
mation. For example, people living with HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S may be stigmatised; 
survivors of human rights violations must be guaranteed safe and con(cid:196)den-
tial assistance (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1(cid:16).

6.  Meeting  Sphere’s  minimum  standards:  The  time  taken  to  reach  the 
minimum  standards  will  depend  on  the  context:  it  will  be  affected  by 
resources,  access,  insecurity  and  the  living  standards  of  the  area  prior  to 
a disaster. Tension may be created if the affected population attains stan-
dards that exceed those of the host and(cid:22)or wider population, or even worsen 
their conditions. (cid:43)evelop strategies to minimise the disparities and risks by, 

67

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

for example, mitigating any negative impacts of the response on the wider 
natural environment and economy and advocating to increase the standards 
of the host population. Where and when possible, increase the scope of the 
response to include the host population.

7.  Early  recovery  and  risk  reduction:  Actions  taken  at  the  earliest  oppor-
tunity  to  strengthen  local  capacity,  work  with  local  resources  and  restore 
services, education, markets and livelihood opportunities will promote early 
economic  recovery  and  the  ability  of  people  to  manage  risk  after  external 
assistance has ended (cid:15)see Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16). (cid:40)t the very least, 
humanitarian response should not harm or compromise the quality of life for 
future generations and inadvertently contribute to future ha(cid:97)ards (cid:15)through, 
for example, deforestation and the unsustainable use of natural resources(cid:16).  
Once  immediate  threats  to  life  have  been  stabilised,  analyse  present  and 
(multiple) potential future hazards (such as those created by climate change). 
(cid:43)esign  to  reduce  future  risks.  For  example,  take  opportunities  during  the 
response to invest in risk reduction and ‘build back safer’. Examples include 
building  earth(cid:88)uake-  and  hurricane-resistant  houses,  protecting  wetlands 
that absorb storm surges and supporting policy development and commu-
nity-driven initiatives in early warning and disaster preparedness.

Core Standard 5: Performance, transparency and learning

The performance of humanitarian agencies is continually examined 
and  communicated  to  stakeholders;  projects  are  adapted  in 
response to performance.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Establish  systematic  but  simple,  timely  and  participatory  mechanisms  to 
monitor progress towards all relevant Sphere standards and the programme’s 
stated principles, outputs and activities (cid:15)see guidance note 1(cid:16).

 »

Establish basic mechanisms for monitoring the agency’s overall performance 
with respect to the agency’s management and quality control systems (see 
guidance note 2).

 » Monitor the outcomes and, where possible, the early impact of a humani-
tarian response on the affected and wider populations (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

Establish  systematic  mechanisms  for  adapting  programme  strategies  in 
response to monitoring data, changing needs and an evolving context (cid:15)see 
guidance note 4).

68

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

 » Conduct periodic re(cid:197)ection and learning exercises throughout the implemen-

tation of the response.

 » Carry out a (cid:196)nal evaluation or other form of objective learning review of the 
programme,  with  reference  to  its  stated  objectives,  principles  and  agreed 
minimum standards (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

 »

Participate  in  joint,  inter-agency  and  other  collaborative  learning  initiatives 
wherever feasible.

Share key monitoring (cid:196)ndings and, where appropriate, the (cid:196)ndings of evalu-
ation and other key learning processes with the affected population, relevant 
authorities  and  coordination  groups  in  a  timely  manner  (see  guidance 
note 6).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Programmes are adapted in response to monitoring and learning information.

 » Monitoring  and  evaluation  sources  include  the  views  of  a  representative 
number of people targeted by the response, as well as the host community 
if different.

 »

 »

 »

(cid:40)ccurate, updated, non-con(cid:196)dential progress information is shared with the 
people  targeted  by  the  response  and  relevant  local  authorities  and  other 
humanitarian agencies on a regular basis.

Performance is regularly monitored in relation to all Sphere Core and relevant 
technical  minimum  standards  (and  related  global  or  agency  performance 
standards(cid:16), and the main results shared with key stakeholders (cid:15)see guidance 
note 6).

Agencies consistently conduct an objective evaluation or learning review of 
a major humanitarian response in accordance with recognised standards of 
evaluation practice (see guidance note 6).

Guidance notes
1.  Monitoring  compares  intentions  with  results.  It  measures  progress 
against  project  objectives  and  indicators  and  its  impact  on  vulnerability 
and  the  context.  Monitoring  information  guides  project  revisions,  veri(cid:196)es 
targeting  criteria  and  whether  aid  is  reaching  the  people  intended.  It 
enables decision-makers to respond to community feedback and identify 
emerging  problems  and  trends.  It  is  also  an  opportunity  for  agencies 
to  provide,  as  well  as  gather,  information.  Effective  monitoring  selects 
methods  suited  to  the  particular  programme  and  context,  combining 

69

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

records.  Openness  and  communication 

qualitative  and  quantitative  data  as  appropriate  and  maintaining 
consistent 
(transparency) 
about  monitoring  information  increases  accountability  to  the  affected 
population. Monitoring carried out by the population itself further enhances 
transparency  and  the  quality  and  people’s  ownership  of  the  information. 
Clarity about the intended use and users of the data should determine what 
is collected and how it is presented. Data should be presented in a brief 
accessible format that facilitates sharing and decision-making.

2.  Agency  performance  is  not  con(cid:196)ned  to  measuring  the  extent  of  its 
programme  achievements.  It  covers  the  agency’s  overall  function  –  its 
progress with respect to aspects such as its relationships with other organ-
isations, adherence to humanitarian good practice, codes and principles and 
the effectiveness and ef(cid:196)ciency of its management systems. (cid:56)uality assur-
ance approaches such as Groupe URD’s Quality Compas can be used to 
assess overall agency performance.

3. 

Impact  monitoring:  Increasingly,  the  assessment  of  impact  (cid:15)the  wider 
effects  of  interventions  in  the  short  to  medium  term,  positive  or  negative, 
intended or unintended) is viewed as both feasible and essential for humani-
tarian response. Impact assessment is an important emerging (cid:196)eld, linking 
particular  humanitarian  contributions  to  changes  in  populations  and  the 
context that are complex and interrelated. The affected people are the best 
judges  of  changes  in  their  lives;  hence  outcome  and  impact  assessment 
must include people(cid:187)s feedback, open-ended listening and other participa-
tory (cid:88)ualitative approaches, as well as (cid:88)uantitative approaches.

4.  Maintaining relevance: Monitoring should periodically check whether the 
programme  continues  to  be  relevant  to  the  affected  populations.  Findings 
should lead to revisions to the programme as appropriate.

5.  Methods 

tools,  audits  and 

impact  assessments  and 
internal 

for  examining  performance:  Different  approaches  suit 
different  performance,  learning  and  accountability  purposes.  (cid:40)  variety 
of  methods  may  be  used  including  monitoring  and  evaluation,  partici-
patory 
listening  exercises,  (cid:88)uality  assur-
ance 
re(cid:197)ection  exercises. 
learning  and 
Programme evaluations are typically carried out at the end of a response, 
recommending changes to organisational policies and future programmes. 
Performance monitoring and ‘real-time evaluation’ can also be carried out 
during  a  response,  leading  to  immediate  changes  in  policy  and  practice. 
Evaluations are usually carried out by independent, external evaluators but 
internal staff members can also evaluate a programme as long as they take 
an objective approach. This would normally mean agency staff who were not 
involved in the response themselves. Humanitarian evaluation uses a set of 
eight dimensions known as the DAC (Development Assistance Committee) 

70

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

criteria: relevance; appropriateness; connectedness; coherence; coverage; 
ef(cid:196)ciency; effectiveness; and impact.

6.  Sector-wide  performance:  Sharing  information  about  each  agency’s 
progress towards the Sphere minimum standards with coordination groups 
supports  response-wide  monitoring  and  creates  an  invaluable  source  of 
sector-wide performance data.

Core Standard 6: Aid worker performance

Humanitarian agencies provide appropriate management, supervi-
sory  and  psychosocial  support,  enabling  aid  workers  to  have  the 
knowledge, skills, behaviour and attitudes to plan and implement an 
effective humanitarian response with humanity and respect.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Provide  managers  with  ade(cid:88)uate  leadership  training,  familiarity  with  key 
policies and the resources to manage effectively (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

Establish systematic, fair and transparent recruitment procedures to attract 
the maximum number of appropriate candidates (see guidance note 2).

Recruit teams with a balance of women and men, ethnicity, age and social 
background  so  that  the  team’s  diversity  is  appropriate  to  the  local  culture 
and context.

Provide aid workers (cid:15)staff, volunteers and consultants, both national and inter-
national(cid:16) with ade(cid:88)uate and timely inductions, brie(cid:196)ngs, clear reporting lines 
and updated job descriptions to enable them to understand their responsi-
bilities, work objectives, organisational values, key policies and local context.

Establish security and evacuation guidelines, health and safety policies and 
use them to brief aid workers before they start work with the agency.

Ensure  that  aid  workers  have  access  to  medical  care  and  psychosocial 
support.

Establish codes of personal conduct for aid workers that protect disaster-
affected people from sexual abuse, corruption, exploitation and other viola-
tions of people’s human rights. Share the codes with disaster-affected people 
(cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

Promote a culture of respect towards the disaster-affected population (see 
guidance note 4).

71

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

Establish  grievance  procedures  and  take  appropriate  disciplinary  action 
against  aid  workers  following  con(cid:196)rmed  violation  of  the  agency(cid:187)s  code  of 
conduct.

 » Carry out regular appraisals of staff and volunteers and provide feedback on 
performance in relation to work objectives, knowledge, skills, behaviour and 
attitudes.

 »

 »

 »

Support  aid  workers  to  manage  their  workload  and  minimise  stress  (see 
guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Enable  staff  and  managers  to  jointly  identify  opportunities  for  continual 
learning and development (see guidance note 6).

Provide  appropriate  support  to  aid  workers  who  have  experienced  or 
witnessed extremely distressing events (see guidance note 7).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Staff  and  volunteers’  performance  reviews  indicate  adequate  competency 
levels  in  relation  to  their  knowledge,  skills,  behaviour  attitudes  and  the 
responsibilities described in their job descriptions.

 »

 »

 »

Aid workers who breach codes of conduct prohibiting corrupt and abusive 
behaviour are formally disciplined.

The principles, or similar, of the People In (cid:40)id Code of Good Practice are 
re(cid:197)ected in the agency(cid:187)s policy and practice.

The incidence of aid workers(cid:187) illness, injury and stress-related health issues 
remains stable, or decreases over the course of the disaster response.

Guidance notes
1.  Management  good  practice:  People  management  systems  depend  on 
the agency and context but managers and supervisors should be familiar 
with the People In Aid Code of Good Practice which includes policies and 
guidelines  for  planning,  recruitment,  management,  learning  and  develop-
ment,  transition  at  the  end  of  a  contract  and,  for  international  agencies, 
deployment.

2.  Recruitment procedures should be open and understandable to all staff 
and applicants. Such transparency includes the development and sharing 
of updated and relevant job descriptions for each post and is essential to 
establish diverse and competent teams. Existing teams can increase their 
appropriateness and diversity through new recruitment as required. Rapid 
staff expansion may lead to the recruitment of inexperienced team members 
who should be supported by experienced staff.

72

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

3.  Aid  workers’  control  over  the  management  and  allocation  of  valuable 
aid  resources  puts  them  in  a  position  of  power  over  the  disaster-affected 
population. Such power over people dependent on assistance and whose 
protective  social  networks  have  been  disturbed  or  destroyed  can  lead  to 
corruption  and  abuse.  Women,  children  and  persons  with  disabilities  are 
frequently coerced into sexually abusive situations. Sexual activity can never 
be  demanded  in  exchange  for  humanitarian  assistance  or  protection.  No 
individual associated with humanitarian response (cid:15)aid workers and military, 
state or private sector personnel(cid:16) should be party to abuse, corruption or 
sexual exploitation. The forced labour of adults or children, illicit drug use 
and trading in humanitarian goods and services by those connected with 
humanitarian distributions are also prohibited.

4.  Aid workers should respect the values and dignity of the disaster-affected 
population  and  avoid  behaviours  (such  as  inappropriate  dress)  that  are 
culturally unacceptable to them.

5.  Aid workers often work long hours in risky and stressful conditions. An 
agency’s duty of care to its workers includes actions to promote well-being 
and avoid long-term exhaustion, injury or illness. Managers must make aid 
workers aware of the risks and protect them from exposure to unnecessary 
threats to their physical and emotional health through, for example, effec-
tive security management, ade(cid:88)uate rest and recuperation, active support 
to work reasonable hours and access to psychological support. Managers 
can promote a duty of care through modelling good practice and personally 
complying with policy. Aid workers also need to take personal responsibility 
for managing their well-being.

6. 

In  the  early  phase  of  a  disaster,  staff  capacity  development  may  be 
restricted. Over time, through performance reviews and feedback from staff, 
managers should identify and support areas for learning and development. 
Disaster preparedness also provides opportunities to identify and develop 
humanitarian-related competencies.

7.  Psychological  ﬁrst  aid  should  be  immediately  available  to  workers  who 
have experienced or witnessed extremely distressing events (see Essential 
health  services  (cid:182)  mental  health  standard  1  on  page  (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26)  and  References 
and further reading(cid:16). Psychological debrie(cid:196)ng is ineffective and should not 
be provided.

73

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

References and  
further reading
Sources

People-centred humanitarian response
Emergency  Capacity  (cid:41)uilding  (cid:15)EC(cid:41)(cid:16)  Project  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Impact  Measurement  and 
Accountability  in  Emergencies:  The  Good  Enough  Guide.  Oxfam  Publishing. 
Oxford. www.oxfam.org.uk/publications
Human (cid:40)ccountability Partnership (cid:15)H(cid:40)P(cid:16) International (cid:15)forthcoming(cid:16), Standard in 
(cid:40)ccountability and (cid:56)uality Management. Geneva. 
www.hapinternational.org(cid:22)projects(cid:22)standard(cid:22)hap(cid:70)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:70)standard.aspx
Inter-(cid:40)gency  Standing  Committee  (cid:15)I(cid:40)SC(cid:16)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  I(cid:40)SC  Guidelines  on  Mental 
Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency Settings. Geneva.

Coordination and collaboration
Global  Humanitarian  Platform 
(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Global  Humanitarian  Principles  of 
Partnership. A Statement of Commitment Endorsed by the Global Humanitarian 
Platform. Geneva. www.globalhumanitarianplatform.org/pop.html
I(cid:40)SC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Guidance  Note  on  using  the  Cluster  (cid:40)pproach  to  Strengthen 
Humanitarian Response. Geneva.
I(cid:40)SC, Global Cluster (cid:40)pproach: 
http://oneresponse.info/GlobalClusters/Pages/default.aspx
I(cid:40)SC  and  (cid:60)nited  Nations  Of(cid:196)ce  for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian  (cid:40)ffairs 
(cid:15)OCH(cid:40)(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), Civil-Military Guidelines and Reference for Complex Emergencies. 
New York. http://ochaonline.un.org/cmcs/guidelines
OCH(cid:40) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Guidelines on the (cid:60)se of Foreign Military and Civil (cid:43)efence (cid:40)ssets 
In (cid:43)isaster Relief (cid:182) (cid:184)Oslo Guidelines(cid:185). Rev. 1.1. Geneva. 
http://ochaonline.un.org/cmcs

74

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

Assessment
I(cid:40)SC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16),  Initial  Rapid  (cid:40)ssessment  (cid:15)IR(cid:40)(cid:16)  Guidance  Notes  for  Country 
Level.  Geneva.  www.humanitarianreform.org/humanitarianreform/Portals/1/
cluster(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)approach(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)page  (cid:38)(cid:22)clusters(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)page  (cid:38)s  (cid:38)(cid:22)health(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)cluster(cid:22)RT(cid:22)
IR(cid:40)(cid:70)Guidance(cid:70)Country(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)Level(cid:70)(cid:196)eld(cid:70)test.doc
I(cid:40)SC (cid:15)forthcoming(cid:16), Needs (cid:40)ssessment Task Force (cid:15)N(cid:40)TF(cid:16) Operational Guidance 
for Needs Assessments.
Ushahidi mobile phone-based information gathering and sharing:  
www.ushahidi.com

Design and response
Con(cid:197)ict Sensitivity Consortium: www.con(cid:197)ictsensitivity.org(cid:22)
Early  Recovery  Tools  and  Guidance:  http://oneresponse.info/GlobalClusters/
Early(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)Recovery(cid:22)Pages(cid:22)Tools(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)and(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)Guidance.aspx
I(cid:40)SC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Women, Girls, (cid:41)oys and Men: (cid:43)ifferent Needs (cid:182) E(cid:88)ual Opportunities 
(The Gender Handbook in Humanitarian Action). Geneva. 
http://oneresponse.info/crosscutting/gender/Pages/Gender.aspx
Provention  Consortium  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  (cid:61)ulnerability  and  Capacity  (cid:40)nalysis  Guidance 
Note 9. Geneva. www.proventionconsortium.org(cid:22)themes(cid:22)default(cid:22)pdfs(cid:22)tools(cid:70)for(cid:70)
mainstreaming(cid:70)GN9.pdf
(cid:60)nited  Nations  International  Strategy  for  (cid:43)isaster  Reduction  (cid:15)(cid:60)NIS(cid:43)R(cid:16)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), 
Hyogo Framework for (cid:40)ction (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:28): (cid:41)uilding the resilience of nations and 
communities to disasters. Geneva. 
www.unisdr.org/eng/hfa/docs/Hyogo-framework-for-action-english.pdf

Performance, transparency and learning
Active  Learning  Network  for  Accountability  and  Performance  in  Humanitarian 
(cid:40)ction (cid:15)(cid:40)LN(cid:40)P(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), (cid:31)th Review of Humanitarian (cid:40)ction. Overseas (cid:43)evelopment 
Institute (ODI). London. www.alnap.org/initiatives/current/rha/8.aspx
Collaborative  Learning  Projects 
Cambridge, Mass. 
www.cdainc.com(cid:22)cdawww(cid:22)pdf(cid:22)other(cid:22)cda(cid:70)listening(cid:70)project(cid:70)description(cid:70)Pdf.pdf
Groupe (cid:60)R(cid:43) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), (cid:56)uality Compas. 
www.compasqualite.org/en/index/index.php
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  (cid:43)evelopment  (cid:15)OEC(cid:43)(cid:16)  (cid:15)1999(cid:16), 
Guidance for Evaluation of Humanitarian Assistance in Complex Emergencies. 
Paris. www.oecd.org/dac

(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  The  Listening  Project 

(cid:15)LISTEN(cid:16). 

75

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Aid worker performance
People In (cid:40)id (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16), The People In (cid:40)id Code of Good Practice in the Management 
and Support of Aid Personnel. London. http://peopleinaid.org
World Health Organi(cid:97)ation, World (cid:61)ision International and War Trauma Foundation 
(cid:15)forthcoming(cid:16), Psychological First (cid:40)id Guide. Geneva. 
www.who.int(cid:22)mental(cid:70)health(cid:22)emergencies(cid:22)en(cid:22)

Further reading

Assessment and response
Of(cid:196)ce  of  the  (cid:60)nited  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees  (cid:15)(cid:60)NHCR(cid:16)  and 
World Food Programme (cid:15)WFP(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), (cid:49)oint (cid:40)ssessment Mission Guidelines. (cid:25)nd 
Edition. Rome. www.unhcr.org(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:28)f(cid:31)1d(cid:25)f(cid:25).html

Children
(cid:40)ction for the rights of children (cid:15)(cid:40)RC(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), 
www.arc-online.org/using/index.html
Inter-Agency  Network  for  Education  in  Emergencies  (INEE)  and  The  Sphere 
Project  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Integrating  (cid:56)uality  Education  within  Emergency  Response  for 
Humanitarian Accountability: The Sphere–INEE Companionship. Geneva.

Disability
Handicap International, (cid:43)isability Checklist for Emergency Response. 
www.handicap-international.de(cid:22)fileadmin(cid:22)redaktion(cid:22)pdf(cid:22)disability(cid:70)checklist(cid:70)
booklet(cid:70)(cid:23)1.pdf
Women(cid:187)s Commission for Refugee Women and Children (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), (cid:43)isabilities among 
Refugees  and  Con(cid:197)ict-affected  Populations:  (cid:40)  Resource  (cid:50)it  for  Fieldworkers. 
New (cid:64)ork. www.womensrefugeecommission.org(cid:22)docs(cid:22)disab(cid:70)res(cid:70)kit.pdf

Environment
(cid:49)oint  (cid:60)nited  Nations  Environment  Programme  and  OCH(cid:40)  Environment  (cid:60)nit: 
www.reliefweb.int/ochaunep
(cid:50)elly,  C  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Guidelines  for  Rapid  Environmental  Impact  (cid:40)ssessment  in 
(cid:43)isasters.  (cid:41)en(cid:196)eld  Ha(cid:97)ard  Research  Centre,  (cid:60)niversity  College  London  and 
CARE International. London.

76

T h e   C o r e   S t a n d a r d s

(cid:60)NHCR  and  C(cid:40)RE  International  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Framework  for  (cid:40)ssessing,  Monitoring 
and  Evaluating  the  Environment  in  Refugee-related  Operations:  Toolkit  for 
practitioners and managers to help assess, monitor and evaluate environmental 
circumstances, using mainly participatory approaches. Geneva. 
www.unhcr.org(cid:22)(cid:27)a97d1(cid:23)(cid:26)9.html
(cid:60)NHCR and International (cid:60)nion for the Conservation of Nature (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), (cid:60)NHCR 
Environmental Guidelines. Geneva. www.unhcr.org(cid:22)(cid:26)b(cid:23)(cid:26)b(cid:25)a(cid:23)(cid:27).html

Gender
Gender and Disaster Network: http://gdnonline.org
WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), WFP Gender Policy. www.wfp.org(cid:22)content(cid:22)wfp-gender-policy

HIV/AIDS
I(cid:40)SC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Guidelines  for  (cid:40)ddressing  HI(cid:61)  in  Humanitarian  Settings.  Geneva. 
www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/page  ?loader.aspx?page  ?=content-products- 
products(cid:13)sel(cid:36)9

Older people
HelpAge International: www.helpage.org
I(cid:40)SC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Humanitarian  (cid:40)ction  and  Older  Persons  (cid:182)  an  essential  brief  for 
humanitarian  actors.  Geneva.  www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/pageloader.
aspx(cid:38)page(cid:36)content-products-products(cid:13)sel(cid:36)(cid:25)(cid:27)
O(cid:43)I 
people 
asp(cid:38)id(cid:36)(cid:26)(cid:28)7(cid:13)title(cid:36)protecting-assisting-older-people-emergencies

(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Network  paper  (cid:28)(cid:26):  (cid:40)ssisting  and  protecting  older 
London.  www.odi.org.uk/resources/details.

in 

emergencies. 

Performance, monitoring and evaluation
(cid:40)LN(cid:40)P  (cid:40)nnual  Review  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16),  Humanitarian  (cid:40)ction:  Improving  Monitoring  to 
Enhance Accountability and Learning. London. www.alnap.org
(cid:40)LN(cid:40)P  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Real  Time  Evaluations  of  Humanitarian  (cid:40)ction  (cid:15)Pilot  (cid:61)ersion(cid:16). 
London. www.alnap.org
Catley,  (cid:40)  et  al  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Participatory  Impact  (cid:40)ssessment.  Feinstein  International 
Center, Tufts (cid:60)niversity. 
https:(cid:22)(cid:22)wikis.uit.tufts.edu(cid:22)con(cid:197)uence(cid:22)display(cid:22)FIC(cid:22)Participatory(cid:18)Impact(cid:18)(cid:40)ssessment
Groupe (cid:60)R(cid:43) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), (cid:56)uality COMP(cid:40)S Companion (cid:41)ook. 
www.compasqualite.org/en/index/index.php

77

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

OEC(cid:43) (cid:15)1999(cid:16), Guidance for the Evaluation of Humanitarian (cid:40)ssistance in Complex 
Emergencies. Paris. www.oecd.org/dac
Further information on evaluation (including training modules) and approaches to 
learning can be found on ALNAP: www.alnap.org

Targeting
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16), World 
(cid:43)isasters  Report  (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)  (cid:182)  Chapter  1:  Humanitarian  ethics  in  disaster  and  war. 
www.ifrc.org(cid:22)publicat(cid:22)wdr(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:22)chapter1.asp
(cid:60)NIS(cid:43)R (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16), Countering (cid:43)isasters, Targeting (cid:61)ulnerability. Geneva. 
www.unisdr.org(cid:22)eng(cid:22)public(cid:70)aware(cid:22)world(cid:70)camp(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:22)pdf(cid:22)(cid:50)it(cid:70)1(cid:70)Countering(cid:70)
(cid:43)isasters(cid:70)Targeting(cid:70)(cid:61)ulnerability.pdf

78

Minimum Standards  
in Water Supply, 
Sanitation and 
Hygiene Promotion

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

How to use this chapter 

This chapter is divided into seven main sections: 

Water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion (WASH)
Hygiene promotion
Water supply
Excreta disposal
Vector control
Solid waste management
Drainage

The Protection Principles and Core Standards must be used consistently with this chapter. 

Although primarily intended to inform humanitarian response to a disaster, the minimum standards 
may also be considered during disaster preparedness and the transition to recovery activities.

Each section contains the following: 

  Minimum standards: These are qualitative in nature and specify the minimum levels to be 
attained in humanitarian response regarding the provision of water, sanitation and hygiene 
promotion.

 

 

 

Key actions: These are suggested activities and inputs to help meet the standards.

Key indicators: These are ‘signals’ that show whether a standard has been attained. They 
provide a way of measuring and communicating the processes and results of key actions; they 
relate to the minimum standard, not to the key action.

Guidance notes: These include speciﬁc points to consider when applying the minimum stan-
dards, key actions and key indicators in different situations. They provide guidance on tackling 
practical difﬁculties, benchmarks or advice on priority issues. They may also include critical 
issues relating to the standards, actions or indicators, and describe dilemmas, controversies 
or gaps in current knowledge.

If the required key indicators and actions cannot be met, the resulting adverse implications for the 
affected population should be appraised and appropriate mitigating actions taken. 

A  needs  assessment  checklist  is  included  as  Appendix  1;  guideline  notes  are  provided  in 
Appendices 2–6; and a select list of references and further reading, which points to sources of 
information on both speciﬁc and general issues relating to this chapter, is also provided.

80

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

Contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83

1. Water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion (WASH) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88

2. Hygiene promotion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91

3. Water supply . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97

4. Excreta disposal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105

5. Vector control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111

6. Solid waste management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117

7. Drainage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121

Appendix 1:  Water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion  

initial needs assessment checklist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124

Appendix 2:  Minimum water quantities for institutions and other uses . . . . . . . . 129

Appendix 3:  Minimum numbers of toilets at public places and institutions  

in disaster situations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130

Appendix 4:  Water- and excreta-related diseases  

and transmission mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131

Appendix 5:  Minimum hygiene, sanitation and isolation activities for  

cholera treatment centres (CTCs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132

Appendix 6:  Household water treatment and storage decision tree  . . . . . . . . . . . 133

References and further reading  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134

81

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Humanitarian 

Charter

Protection 
Principles

Core  

Standards

Water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion (WASH)

WASH

Hygiene 
promotion

Water 
supply

Excreta 
disposal

Vector 
control

Solid waste 
management

Drainage

Standard 1
WASH 
programme 
design and 
implemen-
tation

Standard 1
Hygiene 
promotion 
implemen-
tation

Standard 1
Access 
and water 
quantity

Standard 1
Environment 
free from 
human 
faeces

Standard 1
Individual 
and family 
protection

Standard1
Collection 
and disposal

Standard 1
Drainage 
work

Standard 2
Identi(cid:196)cation 
and use 
of hygiene 
items

Standard 2
Water 
quality

Standard 2
Appropriate 
and 
adequate 
toilet 
facilitias

Standard 3
Water 
facilities

Standard 2
Physical, 
environ-
mental and 
chemical 
protection 
measures

Standard 3
Chemical 
control 
safety

Appendix 1: Water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion initial needs assessment checklist
Appendix 2: Minimum water quantities for institutions and other uses
Appendix 3: Minimum numbers of toilets at public places and institutions in disaster situations
Appendix 4: Water- and excreta-related diseases and transmission mechanisms
Appendix 5: Minimum hygiene, sanitation and isolation activities for cholera treatment centres (cid:15)CTCs(cid:16)
Appendix 6: Household water treatment and storage decision tree

References and further reading

82

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

Introduction
Links to the Humanitarian Charter and international law

The  minimum  standards  for  water  supply,  sanitation  and  hygiene  promotion 
(WASH)  are  a  practical  expression  of  the  shared  beliefs  and  commitments  of 
humanitarian agencies and the common principles, rights and duties governing 
humanitarian action that are set out in the Humanitarian Charter. Founded on the 
principle of humanity, and re(cid:197)ected in international law, these principles include 
the right to life with dignity, the right to protection and security and the right to 
receive  humanitarian  assistance  on  the  basis  of  need.  A  list  of  key  legal  and 
policy documents that inform the Humanitarian Charter is available for reference 
in (cid:40)nnex 1 (cid:15)see page (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:16), with explanatory comments for humanitarian workers.

(cid:40)lthough states are the main duty-bearers with respect to the rights set out above, 
humanitarian agencies have a responsibility to work with disaster-affected popu-
lations in a way that is consistent with these rights. From these general rights (cid:197)ow 
a number of more speci(cid:196)c entitlements. These include the rights to participation, 
information and non-discrimination that form the basis of the Core Standards, as 
well the speci(cid:196)c rights to water, sanitation, food, shelter and health that underpin 
these and the minimum standards in this Handbook.

Everyone has the right to water and sanitation. This right is recognised in inter-
national legal instruments and provides for suf(cid:196)cient, safe, acceptable, physically 
accessible and affordable water for personal and domestic uses and accessible 
sanitation facilities. An adequate amount of safe water is necessary to prevent 
death from dehydration, to reduce the risk of water-related disease and to provide 
for consumption, cooking and personal and domestic hygienic re(cid:88)uirements. 

The  right  to  water  and  sanitation  is  inextricably  related  to  other  human  rights, 
including the right to health, the right to housing and the right to ade(cid:88)uate food. 
(cid:40)s such, it is part of the guarantees essential for human survival. States and non-
state actors have responsibilities in ful(cid:196)lling the right to water and sanitation. In 
times of armed con(cid:197)ict, for example, it is prohibited to attack, destroy, remove or 
render useless drinking water installations or irrigation works.

83

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The minimum standards in this chapter are not a full expression of the right to 
water and sanitation. However, the Sphere standards re(cid:197)ect the core content of 
the right to water and sanitation and contribute to the progressive realisation of 
this right globally.

The importance of WASH in disasters

Water and sanitation are critical determinants for survival in the initial stages of 
a disaster. People affected by disasters are generally much more susceptible to 
illness and death from disease, which to a large extent are related to inade(cid:88)uate 
sanitation,  inade(cid:88)uate  water  supplies  and  inability  to  maintain  good  hygiene. 
The  most  signi(cid:196)cant  of  these  diseases  are  diarrhoeal  and  infectious  diseases 
transmitted by the faeco-oral route (see Appendix 4: Water- and excreta-related 
diseases  and  transmission  mechanisms).  Other  water-  and  sanitation-related 
diseases  include  those  carried  by  vectors  associated  with  solid  waste  and 
water. The term (cid:186)sanitation(cid:187), throughout the Sphere Handbook, refers to excreta 
disposal, vector control, solid waste disposal and drainage.

The main objective of WASH programmes in disasters is to reduce the transmis-
sion of faeco-oral diseases and exposure to disease-bearing vectors through the 
promotion of:

 »

 »

 »

 »

good hygiene practices 

the provision of safe drinking water 

the reduction of environmental health risks 

the conditions that allow people to live with good health, dignity, comfort and 
security. 

Simply  providing  suf(cid:196)cient  water  and  sanitation  facilities  will  not,  on  its  own, 
ensure  their  optimal  use  or  impact  on  public  health.  In  order  to  achieve  the 
maximum bene(cid:196)t from a response, it is imperative that disaster-affected people 
have the necessary information, knowledge and understanding to prevent water- 
and sanitation-related diseases and to mobilise their involvement in the design 
and maintenance of those facilities. 

The use of communal water and sanitation facilities, for example in refugee or 
displaced situations, can increase women(cid:187)s and girls(cid:187) vulnerability to sexual and 
other forms of gender-based violence. In order to minimise these risks, and to 
provide a better (cid:88)uality of response, it is important to ensure women(cid:187)s participa-
tion  in  water  supply  and  sanitation  programmes.  An  equitable  participation  of 
women and men in planning, decision-making and local management will help 

84

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

to ensure that the entire affected population has safe and easy access to water 
supply and sanitation services, and that services are appropriate.

Better disaster response in public health is achieved through better preparedness. 
Such preparedness is the result of capacities, relationships and knowledge devel-
oped by governments, humanitarian agencies, local civil society organisations, 
communities and individuals to anticipate and respond effectively to the impact 
of likely, imminent ha(cid:97)ards. It is based on an analysis of risks and is well linked to 
early warning systems. Preparedness includes contingency planning, stockpiling 
of  e(cid:88)uipment  and  supplies,  emergency  services  and  stand-by  arrangements, 
personnel training and community-level planning training and drills.

Links to other chapters

Many  of  the  standards  in  the  other  chapters  are  relevant  to  this  chapter. 
Progress in achieving standards in one area often in(cid:197)uences and even deter-
mines progress in other areas. For a response to be effective, close coordina-
tion and collaboration are required with other sectors. Coordination with local 
authorities  and  other  responding  agencies  is  also  necessary  to  ensure  that 
needs are met, that efforts are not duplicated and that the (cid:88)uality of water and 
sanitation interventions is optimised.

For  example,  where  nutritional  standards  have  not  been  met,  the  urgency  to 
improve the standard of water and sanitation is greater as people’s vulnerability to 
disease will have signi(cid:196)cantly increased. The same applies to populations where 
HI(cid:61)  and  (cid:40)I(cid:43)S  prevalence  is  high  or  where  there  is  a  large  proportion  of  older 
people or persons with disabilities. Priorities should be decided on the basis of 
sound information shared between sectors as the situation evolves. Reference is 
also made, where relevant, to companion and complementary standards. 

Links to the Protection Principles and Core Standards 

In order to meet the standards of this Handbook, all humanitarian agencies should 
be guided by the Protection Principles, even if they do not have a distinct protec-
tion mandate or specialist capacity in protection. The Principles are not ‘absolute’: 
it is recognised that circumstances may limit the extent to which agencies are able 
to ful(cid:196)l them. Nevertheless, the Principles re(cid:197)ect universal humanitarian concerns 
which should guide action at all times. 

85

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The Core Standards are essential process and personnel standards shared by 
all sectors. The six core standards cover people-centred humanitarian response; 
coordination and collaboration; assessment; design and response; performance, 
transparency  and  learning;  and  aid  worker  performance.  They  provide  a  single 
reference point for approaches that underpin all other standards in the Handbook. 
Each  technical  chapter,  therefore,  re(cid:88)uires  the  companion  use  of  the  Core 
Standards to help attain its own standards. In particular, to ensure the appropri-
ateness and (cid:88)uality of any response, the participation of disaster-affected people 
– including the groups and individuals most frequently at risk in disasters – should 
be maximised.

Vulnerabilities and capacities of disaster-affected 
populations

This  section  is  designed  to  be  read  in  conjunction  with,  and  to  reinforce,  
the Core Standards. 

It is important to understand that to be young or old, a woman or an individual with 
a disability or HI(cid:61) does not, of itself, make a person vulnerable or at increased risk. 
Rather, it is the interplay of factors that does so: for example, someone who is over 
7(cid:23) years of age, lives alone and has poor health is likely to be more vulnerable than 
someone of a similar age and health status living within an extended family and with 
suf(cid:196)cient income. Similarly, a (cid:26)-year-old girl is much more vulnerable if she is unac-
companied than if she were living in the care of responsible parents.

(cid:40)s  W(cid:40)SH  standards  and  key  actions  are  implemented,  a  vulnerability  and 
capacity analysis helps to ensure that a disaster response effort supports those 
who have a right to assistance in a non-discriminatory manner and who need it 
most.  This  requires  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  local  context  and  of  how 
a particular crisis impacts on particular groups of people in different ways due 
to their pre-existing vulnerabilities (cid:15)e.g. being very poor or discriminated against(cid:16), 
their exposure to various protection threats (e.g. gender-based violence including 
sexual  exploitation(cid:16),  disease  incidence  or  prevalence  (cid:15)e.g.  HI(cid:61)  or  tuberculosis(cid:16) 
and possibilities of epidemics (e.g. measles or cholera). Disasters can make pre-
existing ine(cid:88)ualities worse. However, support for people(cid:187)s coping strategies, resil-
ience and recovery capacities is essential. Their knowledge, skills and strategies 
need to be supported and their access to social, legal, (cid:196)nancial and psychoso-
cial support advocated for. The various physical, cultural, economic and social 
barriers they may face in accessing these services in an equitable manner also 
need to be addressed. 

86

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

The following highlight some of the key areas that will ensure that the rights and 
capacities of all vulnerable people are considered: 

 » Optimise people(cid:187)s participation, ensuring that all representative groups are 
included,  especially  those  who  are  less  visible  (cid:15)e.g.  individuals  who  have 
communication or mobility dif(cid:196)culties, those living in institutions, stigmatised 
youth and other under- or unrepresented groups).

 » Disaggregate data by sex and age (0–80+ years) during assessment – this is 
an important element in ensuring that the WASH sector adequately considers 
the diversity of populations.

 »

Ensure that the right to information on entitlements is communicated in a way 
that is inclusive and accessible to all members of the community. 

87

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The minimum standards

1. Water supply, sanitation 
and hygiene promotion 
(WASH)

The aim of any WASH programme is to promote good personal and environmental 
hygiene in order to protect health, as shown in the diagram below. (cid:40)n effective 
WASH programme relies on an exchange of information between the agency and 
the  disaster-affected  population  in  order  to  identify  key  hygiene  problems  and 
culturally appropriate solutions. Ensuring the optimal use of all water supply and 
sanitation facilities and practising safe hygiene will result in the greatest impact 
on public health.

Hygiene  promotion  is  vital  to  a  successful  WASH  intervention.  The  focus  on 
hygiene  promotion  is  general  and  speci(cid:196)c.  In  general  terms,  hygiene  promo-
tion  is  integral  to  all  of  the  sections  and  is  re(cid:197)ected  in  the  indicators  for  water 
supply, excreta disposal, vector control, solid waste management and drainage. 
More speci(cid:196)cally, the focus narrows on two hygiene promotion standards in this 
chapter and relates to particular hygiene promotion activities.

WASH

Disease prevention

Hygiene improvement in emergencies

 
 

g
n

i
l

t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i

v
n
e

b
a
n
E

88

n
o
i
t
o
m
o
r
p

 
 

i

e
n
e
g
y
H

e
r
a
w
d
r
a
h
o
t

 

 
 
s
s
e
c
c
A

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

WASH standard 1: WASH programme design and implementation

WASH  needs  of  the  affected  population  are  met  and  users  are 
involved in the design, management and maintenance of the facilities 
where appropriate.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance note)
 »

Identify key risks of public health importance in consultation with the affected 
population (cid:15)see guidance note 1 and Core Standards 1, (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27) on pages (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

 »

Provide  and  address  the  public  health  needs  of  the  affected  population 
according to their priority needs (see guidance note 1).

Systematically seek feedback on the design and acceptability of both facili-
ties  and  promotional  methods  from  all  different  user  groups  on  all  WASH 
programme activities (cid:15)see Core Standards 1, (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27) on pages (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance note)
 »

All groups within the population have safe and equitable access to WASH 
resources and facilities, use the facilities provided and take action to reduce 
the public health risk (see Hygiene promotion standard 2 on page 94).

 »

 »

 »

All WASH staff communicate clearly and respectfully with those affected and 
share project information openly with them, including knowing how to answer 
questions from community members about the project. 

There is a system in place for the management and maintenance of facilities as 
appropriate, and different groups contribute e(cid:88)uitably (cid:15)see guidance note 1(cid:16).

(cid:40)ll  users  are  satis(cid:196)ed  that  the  design  and  implementation  of  the  W(cid:40)SH 
programme have led to increased security and restoration of dignity.

Guidance note
1.  Assessing needs: An assessment is needed to identify risky practices that 
might  increase  vulnerability  and  to  predict  the  likely  success  of  both  the 
provision of WASH facilities and hygiene promotion activities. The key risks 
are likely to centre on physical safety in accessing facilities, discrimination 
of marginalised groups that affects access, use and maintenance of toilets, 
the  lack  of  hand-washing  with  soap  or  an  alternative,  the  unhygienic  
collection and storage of water, and unhygienic food storage and preparation. 
The assessment should look at resources available to the population, as well 
as local knowledge and practices, so that promotional activities are effective, 

89

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

relevant  and  practical.  Social  and  cultural  norms  that  might  facilitate  and/
or  compromise  adherence  to  safe  hygiene  practices  should  be  identi(cid:196)ed 
as part of the initial and ongoing assessment. The assessment should pay 
special attention to the needs of vulnerable people. If consultation with any 
group of vulnerable people is not possible, this should be clearly stated in 
the  assessment  report  and  addressed  as  quickly  as  possible  (see  Core 
Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1(cid:16).

90

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

2. Hygiene promotion

Hygiene promotion is a planned, systematic approach to enable people to take 
action to prevent and(cid:22)or mitigate water, sanitation and hygiene-related diseases. 
It can also provide a practical way to facilitate community participation, account-
ability and monitoring in WASH programmes. Hygiene promotion should aim to 
draw on the affected population(cid:187)s knowledge, practices and resources, as well 
as on the current WASH evidence base to determine how public health can best 
be protected. 

Hygiene promotion involves ensuring that people make the best use of the water, 
sanitation and hygiene-enabling facilities and services provided and includes the 
effective operation and maintenance of the facilities. The three key factors are: 

1.  a mutual sharing of information and knowledge 

2. 

(cid:26). 

the mobilisation of affected communities

the provision of essential materials and facilities. 

Community  mobilisation  is  especially  appropriate  during  disasters  as  the 
emphasis must be on encouraging people to take action to protect their health. 
Promotional activities should include, where possible, interactive methods, rather 
than focusing exclusively on the mass dissemination of messages. 

Hygiene promotion standard 1: Hygiene promotion implementation

(cid:40)ffected  men,  women  and  children  of  all  ages  are  aware  of  key 
public health risks and are mobilised to adopt measures to prevent 
the deterioration in hygienic conditions and to use and maintain the 
facilities provided.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes) 
 »

Systematically  provide  information  on  hygiene-related  risks  and  preventive 
actions using appropriate channels of mass communication (see guidance 
notes 1–2).

91

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

Identify speci(cid:196)c social, cultural or religious factors that will motivate different 
social  groups  in  the  community  and  use  them  as  the  basis  for  a  hygiene 
promotion communication strategy (see guidance note 2).

 » Use interactive hygiene communication methods wherever feasible in order to 
ensure ongoing dialogue and discussions with those affected (see guidance 
note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

In  partnership  with  the  affected  community,  regularly  monitor  key  hygiene 
practices and the use of facilities provided (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26) and Core 
Standard (cid:28), guidance notes 1, (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:28) on pages (cid:29)9(cid:182)7(cid:23)(cid:16).

 » Negotiate with the population and key stakeholders to de(cid:196)ne the terms and 

conditions for community mobilisers (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16). 

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes) 
 »

All  user  groups  can  describe  and  demonstrate  what  they  have  done  to 
prevent the deterioration of hygiene conditions (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

 »

 »

All facilities provided are appropriately used and regularly maintained. 

(cid:40)ll people wash their hands after defecation, after cleaning a child(cid:187)s bottom, 
before eating and preparing food (see guidance note 6).

All hygiene promotion activities and messages address key behaviours and 
misconceptions and are targeted at all user groups (see guidance note 6).

Representatives  from  all  user  groups  are  involved  in  planning,  training, 
implementation,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the  hygiene  promotion 
work (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:29) and Core Standard 1, guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:28),  
on page (cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)7(cid:16).

 » Care-takers  of  young  children  and  infants  are  provided  with  the  means 
for  safe  disposal  of  children’s  faeces  (see  Excreta  disposal  standard  1  on 
page 1(cid:23)(cid:28) and guidance note (cid:29)(cid:16). 

Guidance notes 
1.  Targeting  priority  hygiene  risks  and  behaviours:  The  understanding 
gained through assessing hygiene risks, tasks and responsibilities of different 
groups should be used to plan and prioritise assistance, so that the informa-
tion (cid:197)ow between humanitarian actors and the affected population is appro-
priately targeted and misconceptions, where found, are addressed. 

2.  Reaching all sections of the population: In the early stages of a disaster, it 
may be necessary to rely on the mass media to ensure that as many people 
as  possible  receive  important  information  about  reducing  health  risks. 

92

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

(cid:43)ifferent groups should be targeted with different information, education and 
communication materials through relevant communication channels, so that 
information reaches all members of the population. This is especially impor-
tant for those who are non-literate, have communication dif(cid:196)culties and(cid:22)or do 
not have access to radio or television. Popular media (cid:15)drama, songs, street 
theatre,  dance,  etc.(cid:16)  might  also  be  effective  in  this  instance.  Coordination 
with the education cluster will be important to determine the opportunities 
for carrying out hygiene activities in schools. 

3. 

Interactive methods: Participatory materials and methods that are culturally 
appropriate offer useful opportunities for affected people to plan and monitor 
their  own  hygiene  improvements.  It  also  gives  them  the  opportunity  to 
make suggestions or complaints about the programme, where necessary. 
The planning of hygiene promotion must be culturally appropriate. Hygiene 
promotion  activities  need  to  be  carried  out  by  facilitators  who  have  the 
characteristics and skills to work with groups that might share beliefs and 
practices  different  from  their  own  (cid:15)for  example,  in  some  cultures  it  is  not 
acceptable for women to speak to unknown men). 

4.  Overburdening: It is important to ensure that no one group (e.g. women) 
within  the  affected  population  is  overburdened  with  the  responsibility  for 
hygiene  promotion  activities  or  the  management  of  activities  that  promote 
hygiene. (cid:41)ene(cid:196)ts, such as training and employment opportunities, should be 
offered to women, men and marginalised groups.

5.  Terms  and  conditions  for  community  mobilisers:  The  use  of  outreach 
workers or home visitors provides a potentially more interactive way to access 
large  numbers  of  people,  but  these  workers  will  need  support  to  develop 
facilitation skills. (cid:40)s a rough guide in a camp scenario, there should be two 
hygiene promoters(cid:22)community mobilisers per 1,(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) members of the affected 
population. Community mobilisers may also be employed as daily workers, 
on a contract or on a voluntary basis, and in accordance with national legisla-
tion. Whether workers have paid or volunteer status must be discussed with 
the affected population, implementing organisations and across clusters to 
avoid creating tension and disrupting the long-term sustainability of systems 
already in place. 

6.  Motivating different groups to take action: It is important to realise that 
health may not be the most important motivator for changes in behaviour. 
The  need  for  privacy,  safety,  convenience,  observation  of  religious  and 
cultural  norms,  social  status  and  esteem  may  be  stronger  driving  forces 
than the promise of better health. These triggering factors need to be taken 
into account when designing promotional activities and must be effectively 
incorporated  into  the  design  and  siting  of  facilities  in  conjunction  with  the  

93

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

engineering team. The emphasis should not be solely on individual behav-
ioural change but also on social mobilisation and working with groups. 

Hygiene promotion standard 2: Identiﬁcation and use 
of hygiene items 

The  disaster-affected  population  has  access  to  and  is  involved 
in  identifying  and  promoting  the  use  of  hygiene  items  to  ensure 
personal hygiene, health, dignity and well-being. 

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Consult all men, women and children of all ages on the priority hygiene items 

they re(cid:88)uire (cid:15)see guidance notes 1, (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27)(cid:16).

 » Undertake a timely distribution of hygiene items to meet the immediate needs 

of the community (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

 » Carry out post-distribution monitoring to assess use of and bene(cid:196)ciary satis-

faction with distributed hygiene items (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26) and (cid:28)(cid:16). 

 »

Investigate and assess the use of alternatives to the distribution of hygiene 
items,  e.g.  provision  of  cash,  vouchers  and(cid:22)or  non-food  items  (cid:15)NFIs(cid:16)  (cid:15)see 
Food security – cash and voucher transfers standard 1 on page 200). 

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Women, men and children have access to hygiene items and these are used 
effectively to maintain health, dignity and well-being (cid:15)see guidance notes 1, 
7 and 9).

 »

 »

 »

 »

All  women  and  girls  of  menstruating  age  are  provided  with  appropriate 
materials  for  menstrual  hygiene  following  consultation  with  the  affected 
population (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:28) and (cid:31)(cid:16).

(cid:40)ll women, men and children have access to information and training on the 
safe use of hygiene items that are unfamiliar to them (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Information on the timing, location, content and target groups for an NFI distri-
bution is made available to the affected population (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

The safety of affected populations and staff is prioritised when organising an NFI 
distribution (cid:15)see Protection Principle 1, guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:16).

94

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

Guidance notes
1.  Basic  hygiene  items:  A  basic  minimum  hygiene  items  pack  consists  of 
water  containers  (cid:15)buckets(cid:16),  bathing  and  laundry  soaps,  and  menstrual 
hygiene materials.

 List of basic hygiene items 

10–20 litre capacity water container 
for transportation 

One per household

10–20 litre capacity water container 
for storage 

One per household 

(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23)g bathing soap

200g laundry soap

One per person per month

One per person per month

Acceptable material for menstrual 
hygiene, e.g. washable cotton cloth 

One per person 

2.  Coordination: Discuss with the shelter cluster and the affected population 
whether additional non-food items, such as blankets, which are not included 
in the basic hygiene items are required (see Non-food items standard 1 on 
page 269). 

3.  Timeliness of hygiene items distribution: In order to ensure a timely distri-
bution of hygiene items, it may be necessary to distribute some key generic 
items  (cid:15)soap,  jerrycans,  etc.(cid:16)  without  the  agreement  of  the  affected  popu-
lation and come to an agreement concerning future distributions following 
consultation. 

4.  Priority needs: People may choose to sell the items provided if their priority 
needs  are  not  appropriately  met  and  so  people’s  livelihoods  need  to  be 
considered when planning distributions.

5.  Appropriateness: Care should be taken to avoid specifying products that 
would not be used due to lack of familiarity or that could be misused (e.g. 
items  that  might  be  mistaken  for  food).  Where  culturally  appropriate  or 
preferred, washing powder can be speci(cid:196)ed instead of laundry soap.

6.  Replacement:  Consideration  should  be  given  for  consumables  to  be 

replaced where necessary.

7.  Special  needs:  Some  people  with  speci(cid:196)c  needs  (cid:15)e.g.  incontinence  or 
severe diarrhoea) may require increased quantities of personal hygiene items 
such as soap. Persons with disabilities or those who are con(cid:196)ned to bed may 

95

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

need additional items, such as bed pans. Some items may re(cid:88)uire adaptation 
for sanitary use (such as a stool with a hole or commode chair).

8.  Menstrual  hygiene:  Provision  must  be  made  for  discreet  laundering  or 

disposal of menstrual hygiene materials. 

9.  Additional items: Existing social and cultural practices may require access 
to additional personal hygiene items. Subject to availability, such items (cid:15)per 
person per month) could include:

 - 7(cid:28)ml(cid:22)1(cid:23)(cid:23)g toothpaste 
 - one toothbrush
 - (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23)ml shampoo
 - (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23)ml lotion for infants and children up to (cid:25) years of age
 - one disposable razor
 - underwear for women and girls of menstrual age
 - one hairbrush and/or comb
 - nail clippers 
 - nappies (diapers) and potties (dependent on household need).

96

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

3. Water supply

Water is essential for life, health and human dignity. In extreme situations, there 
may  not  be  suf(cid:196)cient  water  available  to  meet  basic  needs  and  in  these  cases 
supplying a survival level of safe drinking water is of critical importance. In most 
cases, the main health problems are caused by poor hygiene due to insuf(cid:196)cient 
water and by the consumption of contaminated water.

Water supply standard 1: Access and water quantity

(cid:40)ll  people  have  safe  and  e(cid:88)uitable  access  to  a  suf(cid:196)cient  (cid:88)uantity 
of water for drinking, cooking and personal and domestic hygiene. 
Public  water  points  are  suf(cid:196)ciently  close  to  households  to  enable 
use of the minimum water requirement.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Identify appropriate water sources for the situation, taking into consideration 
the quantity and environmental impact on the sources (see guidance note 1).

 »

Prioritise  and  provide  water  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  affected 
population (see guidance notes 2 and 4). 

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

(cid:40)verage  water  use  for  drinking,  cooking  and  personal  hygiene  in  any 
household is at least 1(cid:28) litres per person per day (see guidance notes 1–7).

 »

The  maximum  distance  from  any  household  to  the  nearest  water  point  is 
(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:23) metres (cid:15)see guidance notes 1, (cid:25), (cid:28) and (cid:29)(cid:16). 

 » (cid:56)ueueing time at a water source is no more than (cid:26)(cid:23) minutes (cid:15)see guidance 

note 6). 

Guidance notes
1.  Water  sources  selection:  The  following  factors  should  be  considered  in 
water source selection: availability, proximity and sustainability of suf(cid:196)cient 

97

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

(cid:88)uantity of water; whether treatment is needed; and its feasibility, including 
the existence of any social, political or legal factors concerning the source. 
Generally,  groundwater  sources  and(cid:22)or  gravity-(cid:197)ow  supplies  from  springs 
are preferable, as they re(cid:88)uire less treatment and no pumping. In disasters, a 
combination of approaches and sources is often required in the initial phase. 
All sources need to be regularly monitored to avoid over-exploitation.

2.  Needs: The (cid:88)uantities of water needed for domestic use is context based, 
and  may  vary  according  to  the  climate,  the  sanitation  facilities  available, 
people(cid:187)s  habits,  their  religious  and  cultural  practices,  the  food  they  cook, 
the  clothes  they  wear,  and  so  on.  Water  consumption  generally  increases 
the nearer the water source is to the dwelling. Where possible, 1(cid:28) litres per 
person per day (l/p/d) can be exceeded to conform to local standards where 
that standard is higher. 

Basic survival water needs 

Survival needs: water 
intake  
(drinking and food)

(cid:25).(cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:26) litres per day

Basic hygiene practices

2–6 litres per day

Basic cooking needs

(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:29) litres per day

Depends on the 
climate and individual 
physiology

Depends on social and 
cultural norms

Depends on food type 
and social and cultural 
norms

Total basic water needs

7.(cid:28)(cid:182)1(cid:28) litres per day

For guidance on minimum water quantities needed for institutions and other 
uses, see (cid:40)ppendix (cid:25): Minimum water (cid:88)uantities for institutions and other 
uses. For emergency livestock water needs, refer to Livestock Emergency 
Guidelines and Standards (see References and further reading).

3.  Measurement:  Household  surveys,  observation  and  community  discus-
sion  groups  are  more  effective  methods  of  collecting  data  on  water  use 
and consumption than the measurement of water pumped into the pipeline 
network or the operation of hand pumps.

4.  Quantity/coverage:  In  a  disaster,  and  until  minimum  standards  for  both 
water (cid:88)uantity and (cid:88)uality are met, the priority is to provide e(cid:88)uitable access 
to an adequate quantity of water even if it is of intermediate quality. Disaster-
affected people are signi(cid:196)cantly more vulnerable to disease; therefore, water 
access and quantity indicators should be reached even if they are higher than 
the norms of the affected or host population. Particular attention should be 

98

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

paid to ensure the need for extra water for people with speci(cid:196)c health condi-
tions, such as HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S, and to meet the water re(cid:88)uirement for livestock 
and crops in drought situations. To avoid hostility, it is recommended that 
water and sanitation coverage address the needs of both host and affected 
populations equally (see Appendix 2: Minimum water quantities for institu-
tions and other uses). 

5.  Maximum numbers of people per water source: The number of people 
per source depends on the yield and availability of water at each source. The 
approximate guidelines are:

(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23) people per tap

based on a (cid:197)ow of 7.(cid:28) litres(cid:22)minute

(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:23) people per hand pump

based on a (cid:197)ow of 17 litres(cid:22)minute

400 people per single-user open well

based on a (cid:197)ow of 1(cid:25).(cid:28) litres(cid:22)minute

These  guidelines  assume  that  the  water  point  is  accessible  for  approxi-
mately eight hours a day only and water supply is constant during that time. 
If access is greater than this, people can collect more than the 1(cid:28) litres(cid:22)day 
minimum re(cid:88)uirement. These targets must be used with caution, as reaching 
them does not necessarily guarantee a minimum quantity of water or equi-
table access.

6.  Queueing time: Excessive (cid:88)ueueing times are indicators of insuf(cid:196)cient water 
availability due to either an inadequate number of water points or inadequate 
yields at water sources. The potential negative results of excessive queueing 
times  are  reduced  per  capita  water  consumption,  increased  consumption 
from  unprotected  surface  sources  and  reduced  time  for  other  essential 
survival tasks for those who collect water.

7.  Access and equity: Even if a suf(cid:196)cient (cid:88)uantity of water is available to meet 
minimum needs, additional measures are needed to ensure e(cid:88)uitable access 
for all groups. Water points should be located in areas that are accessible to 
all, regardless of, for example, gender or ethnicity. Some hand pumps and 
water carrying containers may need to be designed or adapted for use by 
people living with HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S, older people, persons with disabilities and 
children.  In  situations  where  water  is  rationed  or  pumped  at  given  times, 
this  should  be  planned  in  consultation  with  the  users  including  women 
bene(cid:196)ciaries.

99

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Water supply standard 2: Water quality

Water is palatable and of suf(cid:196)cient (cid:88)uality to be drunk and used for 
cooking and personal and domestic hygiene without causing risk 
to health. 

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » (cid:60)ndertake a rapid sanitary survey and, where time and situation allow, imple-

ment a water safety plan for the source (see guidance notes 1–2). 

 »

 »

Implement all necessary steps to minimise post-delivery water contamination 
(cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27) and Hygiene promotion standard 1 on page 91(cid:16).

For piped water supplies, or all water supplies at times of risk of diarrhoeal 
epidemics,  undertake  water  treatment  with  disinfectant  so  that  there  is  a 
chlorine residual of (cid:23).(cid:28)mg(cid:22)l and turbidity is below (cid:28) NT(cid:60) (cid:15)nephelolometric 
turbidity units(cid:16) at the tap. In the case of speci(cid:196)c diarrhoeal epidemics, ensure 
that there is residual chlorine of above 1mg(cid:22)l (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:31)(cid:16).

 » Where household-level water treatment is proposed, ensure that it is accom-
panied  by  appropriate  promotion,  training  and  monitoring  (cid:15)see  guidance 
notes (cid:26) and (cid:29)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

There are no faecal coliforms per 100ml of water at the point of delivery and 
use (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:182)7(cid:16). 

 »

 »

 »

 »

Any household-level water treatment options used are effective in improving 
microbiological water (cid:88)uality and are accompanied by appropriate training, 
promotion and monitoring (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16). 

There  is  no  negative  effect  on  health  due  to  short-term  use  of  water 
contaminated  by  chemicals  (including  carry-over  of  treatment  chemicals) 
or radiological sources, and assessment shows no signi(cid:196)cant probability of 
such an effect (see guidance note 7).

All affected people drink water from a protected or treated source in prefer-
ence to other readily available water sources (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26) and (cid:29)(cid:16).

There is no outbreak of water-borne or water-related diseases (see guidance 
notes 1–9).

100

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

Guidance notes 
1.  A sanitary survey and water safety plan: A sanitary survey is an assess-
ment of conditions and practices that may constitute a public health risk. It 
covers possible sources of contamination to water at the source in transport 
and in the home, defecation practices, drainage and solid waste manage-
ment.  Community  mapping  is  a  particularly  effective  way  of  identifying 
where  the  public  health  risks  are  and  thereby  involving  the  community  in 
(cid:196)nding ways to reduce these risks. Note that while animal excreta is not as 
harmful as human excreta, it can contain micro-organisms, such as cryp-
tosporidium,  giardia,  salmonella,  campylobacter,  caliciviruses  and  other 
common  causes  of  human  diarrhoea,  and  therefore  presents  a  signi(cid:196)cant 
health risk. WHO recommends the use of its water safety plan (cid:15)WSP(cid:16), which 
is a holistic approach covering ha(cid:97)ard identi(cid:196)cation and risk assessment, an 
improvement(cid:22)upgrade  plan,  monitoring  of  control  measures  and  manage-
ment  procedures,  including  the  development  of  supporting  programmes 
(see References and further reading). 

2.  Microbiological  water  quality:  Faecal  coliform  bacteria  (>99  per  cent  of 
which are E. coli) are an indicator of the level of human and/or animal waste 
contamination in water and the possibility of the presence of harmful patho-
gens. If any faecal coliforms are present, the water should be treated. 

3.  Promotion of protected sources: Merely providing protected sources or 
treated  water  will  have  little  impact  unless  people  understand  the  health 
bene(cid:196)ts of this water and therefore use it. People may prefer to use unpro-
tected sources, e.g. rivers, lakes and unprotected wells, for reasons such as 
taste, proximity and social convenience. In such cases, technicians, hygiene 
promoters and community mobilisers need to understand the rationale for 
the preferences so that their consideration can be included in promotional 
messages and discussions.

4.  Post-delivery contamination: Water that is safe at the point of delivery can 
nevertheless present a signi(cid:196)cant health risk due to recontamination during 
collection, storage and drawing. Steps that can be taken to minimise such 
risk  include  improved  collection  and  storage  practices  and  distribution  of 
clean and appropriate collection and storage containers (see Water supply 
standard (cid:26) on page 1(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16). Water should be routinely sampled at the point of 
use to monitor the extent of any post-delivery contamination. 

5.  Water  disinfection:  Water  should  be  treated  with  a  residual  disinfec-
tant such as chlorine if there is a signi(cid:196)cant risk of source or post-delivery 
contamination. This risk will be determined by conditions in the settlement, 
such as population density, excreta disposal arrangements, hygiene prac-
tices and the prevalence of diarrhoeal disease. In the case of a threat or the  

101

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

existence  of  a  diarrhoea  epidemic,  all  drinking  water  supplies  should  be 
treated, either before distribution or in the home. For water to be disinfected 
properly, turbidity must be below (cid:28) NT(cid:60), although for short-term emergency 
use,  water  of  higher  turbidity  can  be  ade(cid:88)uately  disinfected  with  double 
chlorine  dosage  after  (cid:196)ltration  until  turbidity  reduction  is  achieved  (cid:15)see 
Appendix 6: Household water treatment and storage decision tree).

6.  Household-level water treatment: When use of a centrally operated water 
treatment system is not possible, point-of-use water treatment (cid:15)Po(cid:60)WT(cid:16) at 
household  level  can  be  used  as  an  option.  The  different  types  of  PoUWT 
options shown to reduce diarrhoea and improve the microbiological quality 
of  stored  household  water  include  boiling,  chlorination,  solar  disinfection, 
ceramic (cid:196)ltration, slow sand (cid:196)ltration and (cid:197)occulation(cid:22)disinfection. The most 
appropriate PoUWT option for any given context depends on existing water 
and sanitation conditions, water (cid:88)uality, cultural acceptability and the imple-
mentation feasibility of any of the options. Successful PoUWT should include 
the provision of adequate materials and products and appropriate training for 
the bene(cid:196)ciaries. Introducing an untested water treatment option in a disaster 
situation should be avoided. In areas with anticipated risk, pre-placement of 
PoUWT products should be considered to facilitate a quick response. The 
use  of  locally  available  products  should  be  prioritised  if  continued  use  in 
the post-disaster phase is desired. Effective use of PoUWT requires regular 
follow-up,  support  and  monitoring  and  this  should  be  a  prere(cid:88)uisite  to 
adopting it as an alternative water treatment approach.

7.  PoUWT  using  chlorine:  Double-dose  chlorination  can  be  considered  for 
higher turbidity where there is no alternative water source. This should be 
attempted only for short periods of time and after educating users to reduce 
turbidity by (cid:196)ltering, settling and decanting before treatment (cid:15)see (cid:40)ppendix 
6: Household water treatment and storage decision tree). 

8.  Chemical  and  radiological  contamination:  Where  hydrogeological 
records  or  knowledge  of  industrial  or  military  activity  suggest  that  water 
supplies  may  carry  chemical  or  radiological  health  risks,  the  risks  should 
be  rapidly  assessed  by  carrying  out  a  chemical  analysis.  A  decision  that 
balances short-term public health risks and bene(cid:196)ts should then be made. 
Furthermore, a decision to use possibly contaminated water for longer-term 
supplies should be made on the basis of a more thorough assessment and 
analysis of the health implications. 

9.  Palatability: Taste is not in itself a direct health problem (e.g. slightly saline 
water does not pose a health risk(cid:16), but if the safe water supply does not taste 
good, users may drink from unsafe sources and put their health at risk. To 
avoid this, hygiene promotion activities are needed to ensure that only safe 
supplies are used.

102

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

10.  Water quality for health centres: (cid:40)ll water for hospitals, health centres and 
feeding centres should be treated with chlorine or another residual disinfec-
tant. In situations where water is likely to be rationed by an interruption of 
supply, suf(cid:196)cient water storage should be available at the centre to ensure 
an uninterrupted supply at normal usage levels (see Appendices 2: Minimum 
water (cid:88)uantities for institutions and other uses and (cid:28): Minimum hygiene, sani-
tation and isolation activities for cholera treatment centres).

Water supply standard 3: Water facilities 

People have ade(cid:88)uate facilities to collect, store and use suf(cid:196)cient 
(cid:88)uantities of water for drinking, cooking and personal hygiene, and 
to ensure that drinking water remains safe until it is consumed.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Provide  the  affected  population  with  appropriate  water  collection  and 
storage  facilities  (see  guidance  note  1  and  Hygiene  promotion  standard  2 
on page 94).

 »

 »

Actively encourage the participation of all affected individuals and vulnerable 
people in siting and design of water points and in the construction of laundry 
and bathing facilities (see guidance note 2).

Include, at water distribution points and community laundry facilities, private 
washing  basins  and  laundry  areas  for  women  to  wash  and  dry  undergar-
ments  and  sanitary  cloths  (see  guidance  note  2  and  Hygiene  promotion 
standard 2 on page 94).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Each household has at least two clean water collecting containers of 10–20 
litres, one for storage and one for transportation (cid:15)see guidance note 1 and 
Hygiene promotion standard (cid:25), guidance note 1 on page 9(cid:28)(cid:16).

 » Water collection and storage containers have narrow necks and/or covers for 
buckets or other safe means of storage, for safe drawing and handling, and 
are demonstrably used (see guidance note 1). 

 »

There is at least one washing basin per 100 people and private laundering 
and bathing areas available for women. Enough water is made available for 
bathing and laundry (see guidance note 2).

 » Water at household level is free from contamination at all times (see guidance 

note 1).

103

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

 »

(cid:40)ll people are satis(cid:196)ed with the ade(cid:88)uate facilities they have for water collec-
tion, storage, bathing, hand washing and laundry (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:25)(cid:16).

Regular maintenance of the installed systems and facilities is ensured and 
users are involved in this where possible (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Guidance notes 
1.  Water  collection  and  storage:  People  need  vessels  to  collect  water,  to 
store it and to use it for drinking, cooking, washing and bathing. The vessels 
should be clean, hygienic, easy to carry and appropriate to local needs and 
habits  in  terms  of  si(cid:97)e,  shape  and  design.  Children,  persons  with  disabili-
ties, older people and people living with HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S may need smaller or 
specially designed water carrying containers. The amount of storage capacity 
required depends on the size of the household and the consistency of water 
availability, e.g. approximately four litres per person would be appropriate for 
situations where there is a constant daily supply. Promotion and monitoring 
of safe collection, storage and drawing is an opportunity to discuss water 
contamination issues with vulnerable people, especially women and children.

2.  Communal washing and bathing facilities: People require spaces where 
they can bathe in privacy and with dignity. If this is not possible at the house-
hold  level,  separate  central  facilities  for  men  and  women  will  be  needed. 
Where soap is not available, commonly used alternatives, such as ash, clean 
sand, soda or various plants suitable for washing and(cid:22)or scrubbing, can be 
provided.  Washing  clothes,  particularly  children(cid:187)s  clothes,  is  an  essential 
hygiene activity; cooking and eating utensils also need washing. The number, 
location, design, safety, appropriateness and convenience of facilities should 
be  decided  in  consultation  with  the  users,  particularly  women,  adoles-
cent  girls  and  persons  with  disabilities.  The  location  of  facilities  in  central, 
accessible and well-lit areas with good visibility of the surrounding area can 
contribute to ensuring the safety of users. 

3.  Maintenance of water systems: It is important that the affected population 
is made aware of and provided with all necessary means to maintain and 
sustain the systems provided. 

104

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

4. Excreta disposal

Safe disposal of human excreta creates the (cid:196)rst barrier to excreta-related disease, 
helping to reduce disease transmission through direct and indirect routes. Safe 
excreta  disposal  is,  therefore,  a  major  priority  and  in  most  disaster  situations 
should be addressed with as much speed and effort as the provision of a safe 
water  supply.  The  provision  of  appropriate  facilities  for  defecation  is  one  of  a 
number of emergency responses essential for people(cid:187)s dignity, safety, health and 
well-being.

Excreta disposal standard 1: Environment free from human faeces 

The living environment in general and speci(cid:196)cally the habitat, food 
production areas, public centres and surroundings of drinking water 
sources are free from human faecal contamination.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Implement  appropriate  excreta  containment  measures  immediately  (see 
guidance note 1).

 » Carry  out  rapid  consultation  with  the  affected  population  on  safe  excreta 
disposal and hygienic practices (cid:15)see Hygiene promotion standard 1, guidance 
notes 1(cid:182)(cid:29) on pages 9(cid:25)(cid:182)9(cid:26)(cid:16). 

 » Carry out concerted hygiene promotion campaign on safe excreta disposal 
and use of appropriate facilities (cid:15)see Hygiene promotion standard 1, guidance 
notes 1(cid:182)(cid:29) on pages 9(cid:25)(cid:182)9(cid:26)(cid:16). 

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

The environment in which the affected population lives is free from human 
faeces (see guidance notes 1–2).

 »

(cid:40)ll excreta containment measures, i.e. trench latrines, pit latrines and soak-
away pits, are at least (cid:26)(cid:23) metres away from any groundwater source. The 
bottom of any latrine or soak-away pit is at least 1.(cid:28) metres above the water 
table (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16). 

105

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

In  (cid:197)ood  or  high  water  table  situations,  appropriate  measures  are  taken  to 
tackle  the  problem  of  faecal  contamination  of  groundwater  sources  (see 
guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16). 

 » Drainage or spillage from defecation systems does not contaminate surface 

water or shallow groundwater sources (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

Toilets are used in the most hygienic way possible and children’s faeces are 
disposed of immediately and hygienically (see guidance note 4).

Guidance notes
1.  Safe  excreta  disposal:  Safe  excreta  disposal  aims  to  keep  the  environ-
ment  free  from  uncontrolled  and  scattered  human  faeces.  Immediately 
after  a  disaster  and  while  an  excreta  disposal  management  plan  is  put  in 
place, consider implementing an initial clean-up campaign, demarcating and 
cordoning  off  defecation  areas,  and  siting  and  building  communal  toilets. 
(cid:41)ased on context, a phased approach to solving the sanitation problem at 
hand is most effective. Involve all groups from the disaster-affected popu-
lation  in  the  implementation  of  safe  excreta  disposal  activities.  Where  the 
affected  population  has  not  traditionally  used  toilets,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  conduct  a  concerted  hygiene  promotion  campaign  to  encourage  safe 
excreta disposal and to create a demand for more toilets. In urban disasters 
where there could be damage to existing sewerage systems, assess the situ-
ation and consider installing portable toilets or use septic and/or containment 
tanks that can be regularly desludged. Due consideration should be given to 
desludging, handling, transportation and (cid:196)nal disposal of the sludge.

2.  Defecation  areas:  In  the  initial  phase  and  where  land  is  available,  mark 
off a defecation (cid:196)eld and(cid:22)or construct trench latrines. This will only work if 
the site is correctly managed and maintained and the affected population 
understands the importance of using the facilities provided and where they 
are located. 

3.  Distance  of  defecation  systems  from  water  sources:  The  distance  of 
soak pits, trench latrines and(cid:22)or toilets from water sources should be at least 
(cid:26)(cid:23) metres and the bottom of the pits should be at least 1.(cid:28) metres above 
the groundwater table. These distances need to be increased for (cid:196)ssured 
rocks and limestone, or decreased for (cid:196)ne soils. In some disaster response, 
groundwater pollution may not be an immediate concern if it is not to be 
directly used for drinking. Instead, household-level water treatment or other 
options should be adopted (cid:15)see Water supply standard (cid:25), guidance note (cid:29) 
on page 1(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16). In (cid:197)ooded or high water table environments, it may be neces-
sary to build elevated toilets or septic tanks to contain excreta and prevent it 
contaminating the environment. It is also imperative that drainage or spillage 

106

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

from septic tanks does not contaminate surface water and/or groundwater 
sources. 

4.  Containment of children’s faeces: Give particular attention to the disposal 
of children(cid:187)s faeces, as they are commonly more dangerous than those of 
adults  (excreta-related  infection  among  children  is  frequently  higher  and 
children may not have developed antibodies to infections). Parents and care-
givers  should  be  provided  with  information  about  safe  disposal  of  infants’ 
faeces,  laundering  practices  and  the  use  of  nappies  (cid:15)diapers(cid:16),  potties  or 
scoops for effectively managing safe disposal.

Excreta disposal standard 2: Appropriate and adequate toilet 
facilities 

People have ade(cid:88)uate, appropriate and acceptable toilet facilities, 
suf(cid:196)ciently close to their dwellings, to allow rapid, safe and secure 
access at all times, day and night. 

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Consult and secure the approval of all users (especially women and people 
with limited mobility(cid:16) on the siting, design and appropriateness of sanitation 
facilities  (see  guidance  notes  1–4  and  Protection  Principles  1–2  on  pages 
(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16). 

 »

 »

Provide the affected people with the means, tools and materials to construct, 
maintain and clean their toilet facilities (see guidance notes 6–7).

Provide an adequate supply of water for hand washing and for toilets with 
(cid:197)ush  and(cid:22)or  hygienic  seal  mechanisms,  and  appropriate  anal  cleansing 
material for use in conventional pit latrines (see guidance notes 7–8).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Toilets  are  appropriately  designed,  built  and  located  to  meet  the  following 
requirements:

 - they can be used safely by all sections of the population, including children, 
older people, pregnant women and persons with disabilities (cid:15)see guidance 
note 1)

 - they are sited in such a way as to minimise security threats to users, espe-
cially  women  and  girls,  throughout  the  day  and  the  night  (cid:15)see  guidance 
note (cid:26) and Protection Principle 1, guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:29) on pages (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:16).

107

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 - they provide a degree of privacy in line with the norms of the users (see 

guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16)

 - they  are  suf(cid:196)ciently  easy  to  use  and  keep  clean  and  do  not  present  a 
health ha(cid:97)ard to the environment. (cid:43)epending on the context, the toilets 
are appropriately provided with water for hand washing and(cid:22)or for (cid:197)ushing 
(see guidance notes 7–8)

 - they  allow  for  the  disposal  of  women’s  menstrual  hygiene  materials 
and  provide  women  with  the  necessary  privacy  for  washing  and  drying 
menstrual hygiene materials (see guidance note 9) 

 - they minimise (cid:197)y and mos(cid:88)uito breeding (cid:15)see guidance note 7(cid:16)
 - they are provided with mechanisms for desludging, transport and appro-
priate disposal in the event that the toilets are sealed or are for long-term 
use and there is a need to empty them (see guidance note 11)

 - in high water table or (cid:197)ood situations, the pits or containers for excreta are 
made watertight in order to minimise contamination of groundwater and 
the environment (see guidance note 11).

A  maximum  of  20  people  use  each  toilet  (see  guidance  notes  1–4  and 
(cid:40)ppendix (cid:26): Minimum numbers of toilets at public places and institutions in 
disaster situations).

Separate, internally lockable toilets for women and men are available in public 
places, such as markets, distribution centres, health centres, schools, etc. 
(cid:15)see guidance note (cid:25) and Protection Principles 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16).

 »

 »

 »

Toilets are no more than (cid:28)(cid:23) metres from dwellings (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16). 

 » Use  of  toilets  is  arranged  by  household(s)  and/or  segregated  by  sex  (see 

guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16). 

 »

 »

(cid:40)ll the affected population is satis(cid:196)ed with the process of consultation and 
with the toilet facilities provided and uses them appropriately (see guidance 
notes 1–10).

People wash their hands after using toilets and before eating and food prepa-
ration (see guidance note 8).

Guidance notes 
1.  Acceptable facilities: Successful excreta disposal programmes depend on 
an understanding of people’s varied needs and their participation. It may not 
be possible to make all toilets acceptable to all groups. Special toilets may 
need to be constructed for children, older people and persons with disabili-
ties, e.g. toilets with seats or hand rails or provision of bed pans, potties or 
commodes. The type of sanitation facility adopted depends on the time of 
the intervention, the preferences and cultural habits of the intended users,  

108

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

the  existing  infrastructure,  the  availability  of  water  (cid:15)for  (cid:197)ushing  and  water 
seals(cid:16),  the  soil  formation  and  the  availability  of  construction  materials. 
Different excreta disposal types for different phases of a disaster response 
are listed in the table below.

Possible alternatives for safe excreta disposal

Safe excreta disposal type

Application remarks

1

2

(cid:26)

4

(cid:28)

Demarcated defecation area 
(e.g. with sheeted-off segments)

Trench latrines

Simple pit latrines

First phase: the (cid:196)rst two to three 
days when a huge number of 
people need immediate facilities

First phase: up to two months 

Plan from the start through to 
long-term use

(cid:61)entilated improved pit (cid:15)(cid:61)IP(cid:16) 
latrines 

Context-based for middle- to 
long-term response

Ecological sanitation (Ecosan) 
with urine diversion

Context-based: in response 
to high water table and (cid:197)ood 
situations, right from the start or 
middle to long term

6

Septic tanks

Middle- to long-term phase 

2.  Public toilets: In public places, toilets are provided with established systems 
for proper and regular cleaning and maintenance. Disaggregated population 
data are used to plan the number of women’s cubicles to men’s using an 
approximate ration of (cid:26):1. Where possible, urinals should be provided (cid:15)see 
(cid:40)ppendix (cid:26): Minimum numbers of toilets at public places and institutions in 
disaster situations).

3.  Family toilets: Family toilets are the preferred option where possible. One 
toilet for a maximum of 20 people should be the target. Where there are no 
existing toilets, it is possible to start with one for (cid:28)(cid:23) people and lowering the 
number of users to (cid:25)(cid:23) as soon as possible. In some circumstances, space 
limitations make it impossible to meet these (cid:196)gures. In such cases, advocate 
strongly for extra space. However, it should be remembered that the primary 
aim is to provide and maintain an environment free from human faeces.

4.  Shared facilities: Households should be consulted on the siting and design, 
and the responsible cleaning and maintenance of shared toilets. Generally, 
clean latrines are more likely to be frequently used. Efforts should be made 
to  provide  people  living  with  chronic  illnesses  such  as  HI(cid:61)  and  (cid:40)I(cid:43)S  with 

109

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

easy access to a toilet as they frequently suffer from chronic diarrhoea and 
reduced mobility.

5.  Safe  facilities:  Inappropriate  siting  of  toilets  may  make  women  and  girls 
more vulnerable to attack, especially during the night. Ensure that women 
and girls feel and are safe when using the toilets provided. Where possible, 
communal toilets should be provided with lighting, or households provided 
with torches. The input of the community should be sought with regard to 
ways  of  enhancing  the  safety  of  users  (see  Protection  Principles  1–2  on 
pages (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16).

6.  Use  of  local  building  material  and  tools:  The  use  of  locally  available 
material for construction of latrines is highly recommended. It enhances the 
participation  of  the  affected  population  to  use  and  maintain  the  facilities. 
Providing the population with construction tools will also support this aim.

7.  Water and anal cleansing material: Water should be provided for toilets 
with  water  (cid:197)ush  and(cid:22)or  hygienic  seal  mechanisms.  For  a  conventional  pit 
toilet, it may be necessary to provide toilet paper or other material for anal 
cleansing.  Users  should  be  consulted  on  the  most  culturally  appropriate 
cleansing materials and their safe disposal.

8.  Hand washing: Users should have the means to wash their hands with soap 
or an alternative (cid:15)such as ash(cid:16) after using toilets, after cleaning the bottom 
of a child who has been defecating, and before eating and preparing food. 
There should be a constant source of water near the toilet for this purpose.

9.  Menstruation: Women and girls of menstruating age, including schoolgirls, 
should have access to suitable materials for the absorption and disposal of 
menstrual blood. Women and girls should be consulted on what is cultur-
ally appropriate. Latrines should include provision for appropriate disposal 
of  menstrual  material  or  private  washing  facilities  (see  Hygiene  promotion 
standard (cid:25), guidance notes (cid:25) and (cid:31) on pages 9(cid:28)(cid:182)9(cid:29)(cid:16).

10.  Desludging: When appropriate, and depending on the need, desludging of 
toilets(cid:22)septic tanks and excreta containers, including siting of (cid:196)nal sewage 
disposal point, needs to be considered right from the start.

11.  Toilets in difﬁcult environments: In (cid:197)ood or urban disasters, the provision 
of  appropriate  excreta  disposal  facilities  is  usually  dif(cid:196)cult.  In  such  situa-
tions, various human waste containment mechanisms, such as raised toilets, 
urine diversion toilets, sewage containment tanks and the use of temporary 
disposable  plastic  bags  with  appropriate  collection  and  disposal  systems, 
should be considered. These different approaches need to be supported by 
hygiene promotion activities.

110

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

5. Vector control

A  vector  is  a  disease-carrying  agent  and  vector-borne  diseases  are  a  major 
cause  of  sickness  and  death  in  many  disaster  situations.  Mosquitoes  are  the 
vector responsible for malaria transmission, which is one of the leading causes of 
morbidity and mortality. Mos(cid:88)uitoes also transmit other diseases, such as yellow 
fever, dengue and haemorrhagic fever. Non-biting or synanthropic (cid:197)ies, such as 
the house (cid:197)y, the blow (cid:197)y and the (cid:197)esh (cid:197)y, play an important role in the transmis-
sion of diarrhoeal disease. (cid:41)iting (cid:197)ies, bedbugs and (cid:197)eas are a painful nuisance 
and in some cases transmit signi(cid:196)cant diseases such as murine typhus, scabies 
and plague. Ticks transmit relapsing fever, while human body lice transmit typhus 
and relapsing fever. Rats and mice can transmit diseases, such as leptospirosis 
and  salmonellosis,  and  can  be  hosts  for  other  vectors,  e.g.  (cid:197)eas,  which  may 
transmit Lassa fever, plague and other infections. 

(cid:61)ector-borne diseases can be controlled through a variety of initiatives, including 
appropriate site selection and provision of shelter, water supply, excreta disposal, 
solid  waste  management  and  drainage,  provision  of  health  services  (cid:15)including 
community mobilisation and health promotion(cid:16), use of chemical controls, family and 
individual protection, and effective protection of food stores. The nature of vector-
borne  disease  is  often  complex  and  addressing  vector-related  problems  may 
demand specialist attention. However, there is often much that can be done to help 
prevent the spread of such diseases with simple and effective measures, once the 
disease, its vector and their interaction with the population have been identi(cid:196)ed.

Vector control standard 1: Individual and family protection

All disaster-affected people have the knowledge and the means to 
protect themselves from disease and nuisance vectors that are likely 
to cause a signi(cid:196)cant risk to health or well-being. 

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Raise the awareness of all affected people who are at risk from vector-borne 
diseases  about  possible  causes  of  vector-related  diseases,  methods  of 
transmission and possible methods of prevention (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

111

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 » Help the affected population to avoid exposure to mosquitoes during peak 
biting  times  by  using  all  non-harmful  means  (cid:15)such  as  bed  nets,  repellant 
lotions, etc.(cid:16) that are made available to them (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16). 

 »

Pay special attention to the protection of high-risk groups such as pregnant 
and  feeding  mothers,  babies,  infants,  older  people,  those  with  restricted 
mobility and the sick (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 » Carry out control of human body lice where louse-borne typhus or relapsing 

fever is a threat (see guidance note 4).

 »

Ensure  that  bedding  and  clothing  are  aired  and  washed  regularly  (see 
guidance note 4).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

All populations have access to shelters that do not harbour or encourage the 
growth of vector populations and are protected by appropriate vector control 
measures (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

 »

 »

All populations at risk from vector-borne disease understand the modes of 
transmission and take action to protect themselves (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

All people supplied with insecticide-treated mosquito nets use them effec-
tively (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

All  food  stored  at  the  household  level  is  protected  from  contamination  by 
vectors such as (cid:197)ies, insects and rodents (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:27)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Deﬁning vector-borne disease risk: Decisions about vector control inter-
ventions  should  be  based  on  an  assessment  of  potential  disease  risk,  as 
well as on clinical evidence of a vector-borne disease problem. Factors in(cid:197)u-
encing this risk include:

 - immunity status of the population, including previous exposure, nutritional 
stress  and  other  stresses.  Movement  of  people  (cid:15)e.g.  refugees,  internally 
displaced  people  (IDPs))  from  a  non-endemic  to  an  endemic  area  is  a 
common cause of epidemics

 - pathogen type and prevalence, in both vectors and humans
 - vector species, behaviours and ecology
 - vector numbers (cid:15)season, breeding sites, etc.(cid:16)
 - increased exposure to vectors: proximity, settlement pattern, shelter type, 

existing individual protection and avoidance measures.

112

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

2. 

3. 

4. 

Indicators for vector control programmes: Commonly used indicators for 
measuring  the  impact  of  vector  control  activities  are  vector-borne  disease 
incidence  rates  (cid:15)from  epidemiological  data,  community-based  data  and 
proxy  indicators,  depending  on  the  response(cid:16)  and  parasite  counts  (cid:15)using 
rapid diagnostic kits or microscopy). 

Individual  malaria  protection  measures:  If  there  is  a  signi(cid:196)cant  risk  of 
malaria,  the  systematic  and  timely  provision  of  protection  measures  is 
recommended,  such  as  insecticide-treated  materials,  e.g.  tents,  curtains 
and  bed  nets.  Impregnated  bed  nets  have  the  added  advantage  of  giving 
some protection against body and head lice, (cid:197)eas, ticks, cockroaches and 
bedbugs. Long-sleeved clothing, household fumigants, burning coils, aerosol 
sprays and repellents are among other protection methods that can be used 
against  mosquitoes.  It  is  vital  to  ensure  that  users  understand  the  impor-
tance of protection and how to use the tools correctly so that the protection 
measures are effective. Where resources are scarce, they should be directed 
at individuals and groups most at risk, such as children under (cid:28) years old, 
non-immunes and pregnant women.

Individual protection measures for other vectors: Good personal hygiene 
and regular washing of clothes and bedding are the most effective protec-
tion against body lice. Infestations can be controlled by personal treatment 
(cid:15)powdering(cid:16),  mass  laundering  or  delousing  campaigns  and  by  treatment 
protocols as newly displaced people arrive in a settlement. A clean house-
hold environment, together with good waste disposal and good food storage 
(cid:15)cooked and uncooked(cid:16), will deter rats, other rodents and insects (cid:15)such as 
cockroaches) from entering houses or shelters.

5.  Water-borne diseases: People should be informed of health risks and should 
avoid  entering  bodies  of  water  where  there  is  a  known  risk  of  contracting 
diseases such as schistosomiasis, Guinea worm or leptospirosis (cid:15)transmitted 
by  exposure  to  mammalian  urine,  especially  that  of  rats  (cid:182)  see  (cid:40)ppendix 
4:  Water-  and  excreta-related  diseases  and  transmission  mechanisms). 
(cid:40)gencies may need to work with the affected population to (cid:196)nd alternative 
sources of water or ensure that water for all uses is appropriately treated.

113

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Vector control standard 2: Physical, environmental  
and chemical protection measures

The  environment  where  the  disaster-affected  people  are  placed 
does  not  expose  them  to  disease-causing  and  nuisance  vectors, 
and those vectors are kept to a reduced level where possible.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Settle the displaced populations in locations that minimise their exposure to 
vectors, especially mos(cid:88)uitoes (cid:15)see guidance note 1(cid:16). 

 » Clear and/or modify vector breeding and resting sites where practicable (see 

guidance notes 2–4). 

 » (cid:60)ndertake intensive (cid:197)y control in high-density settlements when there is a 

risk or the presence of a diarrhoea epidemic (see guidance note 2).

 »

Provide  working  referral  mechanisms  for  people  infected  with  malaria  for 
early diagnosis and treatment (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Key indicators
 »

The population density of mosquitoes is kept low to avoid the risk of exces-
sive transmission levels and infection (see guidance note 4).

 »

Fewer people are affected by vector-related health problems (see guidance 
notes 1(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Site selection is important in minimising the exposure of the affected popu-
lation to the risk of vector-borne disease. This should be one of the key factors 
when considering possible sites. With regard to malaria control, for example, 
camps should be located 1(cid:182)(cid:25) kilometres upwind from large breeding sites, 
such as swamps or lakes, whenever an additional clean water source can 
be provided (cid:15)see Shelter and settlement standard (cid:25), guidance notes (cid:28)(cid:182)9 on 
pages (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:25)(cid:28)7(cid:16).

2.  Environmental and chemical vector control: There are a number of basic 
environmental engineering measures that can be taken to reduce the oppor-
tunities for vector breeding. These include the proper disposal of human and 
animal excreta (cid:15)see Excreta disposal section on page 1(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), proper disposal 
of refuse in order to control (cid:197)ies and rodents (cid:15)see Solid waste management 
section  on  page  117(cid:16),  drainage  of  standing  water,  and  clearing  unwanted 

114

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

vegetation cover around open canals and ponds to control mosquitoes (see 
Drainage section on page 121). Such priority environmental health measures 
will  have  some  impact  on  the  population  density  of  some  vectors.  It  may 
not  be  possible  to  have  suf(cid:196)cient  impact  on  all  the  breeding,  feeding  and 
resting sites within a settlement or near it, even in the longer term, and local-
ised chemical control measures or individual protection measures may be 
needed. For example, spraying infected spaces may reduce the number of 
adult  (cid:197)ies  and  prevent  a  diarrhoea  epidemic,  or  may  help  to  minimise  the 
disease burden if employed during an epidemic.

3.  Designing a response: (cid:61)ector control programmes may have no impact on 
disease if they target the wrong vector, use ineffective methods or target the 
right vector in the wrong place or at the wrong time. Control programmes 
should initially aim to address the following objectives: reduce vector popula-
tion  density;  reduce  human  (cid:182)  vector  contact;  and  reduce  vector  breeding 
sites.  Poorly  executed  programmes  can  be  counterproductive.  Detailed 
study  and,  often,  expert  advice  are  needed  and  should  be  sought  from 
national  and  international  health  organisations.  In  addition,  local  advice 
should be sought on local disease patterns, breeding sites, seasonal varia-
tions in vector numbers and incidence of diseases, etc.

4.  Environmental mosquito control: Environmental control aims primarily at 
eliminating mosquito breeding sites. The three main species of mosquitoes 
responsible for transmitting disease are Culex (cid:15)(cid:196)lariasis(cid:16), Anopheles (malaria 
and (cid:196)lariasis(cid:16) and Aedes (yellow fever and dengue). Culex mosquitoes breed 
in stagnant water loaded with organic matter such as latrines, Anopheles in 
relatively  unpolluted  surface  water  such  as  puddles,  slow-(cid:197)owing  streams 
and wells, and Aedes in water receptacles such as bottles, buckets, tyres, 
etc.  Examples  of  environmental  mos(cid:88)uito  control  include  good  drainage, 
properly  functioning  (cid:61)IP  (cid:15)ventilated  improved  pit(cid:16)  latrines,  keeping  lids  on 
the s(cid:88)uatting hole of pit latrines and on water containers, and keeping wells 
covered and/or treating them with a larvicide (e.g. for areas where dengue 
fever is endemic).

5.  Malaria treatment: Malaria control strategies that aim to reduce the mosquito 
population  density  should  be  carried  out  simultaneously  with  early  diagnosis 
and  treatment  with  effective  anti-malarials.  Such  strategies  will  include  elimi-
nating breeding sites, reducing the mos(cid:88)uito daily survival rate and restricting 
the habit of biting humans. Campaigns to encourage early diagnosis and treat-
ment  should  be  initiated  and  sustained.  (cid:40)n  integrated  approach,  combining 
active  case  (cid:196)nding  by  trained  outreach  workers  and  treatment  with  effective 
anti-malarials,  is  more  likely  to  reduce  the  malaria  burden  than  passive  case 
(cid:196)nding  through  centralised  health  services  (cid:15)see  Essential  health  services  (cid:182) 
control of communicable diseases standard (cid:25), guidance note (cid:26) on page (cid:26)1(cid:28)(cid:16). 

115

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Vector control standard 3: Chemical control safety

Chemical vector control measures are carried out in a manner that 
ensures  that  staff,  the  disaster-affected  population  and  the  local 
environment  are  adequately  protected  and  that  avoids  creating 
chemical resistance to the substances used.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance note)
 »

Protect  chemical  handling  personnel  by  providing  training,  protective 
clothing,  bathing  facilities  and  restricting  the  number  of  hours  they  spend 
handling chemicals (see guidance note 1).

 »

Inform  the  disaster-affected  population  about  the  potential  risks  of  the 
substances  used  in  chemical  vector  control  and  about  the  schedule  for 
application. Provide the population with protection during and after the appli-
cation of poisons or pesticides, according to internationally agreed proce-
dures (see guidance note 1).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance note)
 »

Accepted  international  standards  and  norms  are  followed  in  the  choice  of 
(cid:88)uality, storage and transport of chemicals for vector control measures. No 
adverse reactions are reported or observed due to vector control chemicals 
(see guidance note 1).

 »

All  vector  control  chemicals  are  accounted  for  at  all  times  (see  guidance 
note 1).

Guidance note 
1.  National and international protocols: There are clear international proto-
cols and norms, published by WHO, which should be adhered to at all times. 
These are protocols for both the choice and the application of chemicals in 
vector control, including the protection of personnel and training re(cid:88)uirements. 
(cid:61)ector control measures should address two principal concerns: ef(cid:196)cacy and 
safety. If national norms with regard to the choice of chemicals fall short of 
international standards, resulting in little or no impact or endangering health 
and safety, then the agency should consult and lobby the relevant national 
authority for permission to adhere to the international standards.

116

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

6. Solid waste management

Solid  waste  management  is  the  process  of  handling  and  disposal  of  organic 
and ha(cid:97)ardous solid waste which, if unattended appropriately, can pose public 
health risks to the affected population and can have a negative impact on the 
environment.  Such  risks  can  arise  from  the  breeding  of  (cid:197)ies  and  rodents  that 
thrive  on  solid  waste  (cid:15)see  (cid:61)ector  control  section  on  page  111(cid:16)  and  the  pollu-
tion of surface- and groundwater sources due to leachate from mixed household 
and clinical or industrial waste. Uncollected and accumulating solid waste and 
the debris left after a natural disaster may also create an ugly and depressing 
environment,  which  might  help  discourage  efforts  to  improve  other  aspects  of 
environmental health. Solid waste often blocks drainage channels and leads to 
an increased risk of (cid:197)ooding, resulting in environmental health problems associ-
ated with stagnant and polluted surface water. Waste pickers, who gain a small 
income from collecting recyclable materials from waste dumps, may also be at 
risk of infectious disease from hospital waste mixed with household waste.

Solid waste management standard 1: Collection and disposal

The  affected  population  has  an  environment  not  littered  by  solid 
waste, including medical waste, and has the means to dispose of 
their domestic waste conveniently and effectively.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Involve the affected population in the design and implementation of the solid 
waste disposal programme (see guidance note 1).

 » Organise periodic solid waste clean-up campaigns (see guidance note 1). 

 » Consider the potential for small-scale business opportunities or supplemen-

tary income from waste recycling (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

In conjunction with the affected population, organise a system to ensure that 
household waste is put in containers for regular collection to be burned or 
buried in speci(cid:196)ed refuse pits and that clinical and other ha(cid:97)ardous wastes 
are kept separate throughout the disposal chain (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

117

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

 »

 »

 »

Remove  refuse  from  the  settlement  before  it  becomes  a  health  risk  or  a 
nuisance (see guidance notes 2–6). 

Provide  additional  waste  storage  and  collection  facilities  for  host  families, 
re(cid:197)ecting the additional waste accumulation in disaster situations.

Provide clearly marked and appropriately fenced refuse pits, bins or speci(cid:196)ed 
area pits at public places, such as markets and (cid:196)sh processing and slaugh-
tering areas (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

Ensure  there  is  a  regular  refuse  collection  system  in  place  (see  guidance 
notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16). 

 » (cid:60)ndertake  (cid:196)nal  disposal  of  solid  waste  in  such  a  manner  and  place  as  to 
avoid creating health and environmental problems for the host and affected 
populations (see guidance notes 6–7).

 »

 »

Provide personnel who deal with the collection and disposal of solid waste 
material  and  those  involved  in  material  collection  for  recycling  with  appro-
priate protective clothing and immunisation against tetanus and hepatitis B 
(see guidance note 7). 

In the event that the appropriate and digni(cid:196)ed disposal of dead bodies is a 
priority need, coordinate with responsible agencies and authorities dealing 
with it (see guidance note 8). 

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

All households have access to refuse containers which are emptied twice a 
week at minimum and are no more than 100 metres from a communal refuse 
pit (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

 »

 »

 »

All waste generated by populations living in settlements is removed from the 
immediate living environment on a daily basis, and from the settlement envi-
ronment a minimum of twice a week (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

(cid:40)t least one 1(cid:23)(cid:23)-litre refuse container is available per 1(cid:23) households, where 
domestic refuse is not buried on-site (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

There  is  timely  and  controlled  safe  disposal  of  solid  waste  with  a  conse-
quent minimum risk of solid waste pollution to the environment (see guidance 
notes 4–6).

(cid:40)ll  medical  waste  (cid:15)including  dangerous  waste  such  as  glasses,  needles, 
dressings  and  drugs)  is  isolated  and  disposed  of  separately  in  a  correctly 
designed, constructed and operated pit or incinerator with a deep ash pit, 
within the boundaries of each health facility (see guidance notes 4–7).

118

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

Guidance notes 
1.  Planning  and  implementation:  Solid  waste  disposal  should  be  planned 
and  implemented  in  close  consultation  and  coordination  with  the  affected 
population  and  relevant  agencies  and  authorities.  This  should  start  in  the 
beginning of the intervention before a solid waste problem becomes a major 
health  risk  to  the  affected  population.  (cid:43)epending  on  the  context,  periodic 
clean-up campaigns need to be organised in consultation with the popula-
tion and responsible local authorities.

2.  Burial  of  waste:  If  waste  is  to  be  buried  on-site  in  either  household  or 
communal pits, it should be covered daily with a thin layer of earth to prevent 
it attracting vectors such as (cid:197)ies and rodents where it might become their 
breeding  ground.  If  children(cid:187)s  faeces(cid:22)nappies  are  being  disposed  of,  they 
should be covered with earth directly afterwards. Disposal sites should be 
fenced off to prevent accidents and access by children and animals. Care 
should be taken to prevent any leachate contaminating the groundwater. 

3.  Refuse type and quantity: Refuse in settlements varies widely in composi-
tion and (cid:88)uantity, according to the amount and type of economic activity, 
the  staple  foods  consumed  and  local  practices  of  recycling  and/or  waste 
disposal. The extent to which solid waste has an impact on people’s health 
should  be  assessed  and  appropriate  action  taken  if  necessary.  House-
hold waste should be collected in refuse containers for disposal in a pit for 
burying or incineration. Where it is not possible to provide refuse containers 
for each household, communal refuse containers should be provided. Recy-
cling of solid waste within the community should be encouraged, provided it 
presents no signi(cid:196)cant health risk. (cid:43)istribution of commodities that produce 
a large amount of solid waste from packaging or processing on-site should 
be avoided.

4.  Medical waste: Poor management of healthcare waste exposes the popula-
tion, healthcare workers and waste handlers to infections, toxic effects and 
injuries. In a disaster situation, the most ha(cid:97)ardous types of waste are likely 
to  be  infectious  sharps  and  non-sharps  (cid:15)wound  dressings,  blood-stained 
cloth  and  organic  matter  such  as  placentas,  etc.(cid:16).  The  different  types  of 
waste should be separated at source. Non-infectious waste (cid:15)paper, plastic 
wrappings, food waste, etc.(cid:16) can be disposed of as solid waste. Contami-
nated sharps, especially used needles and syringes, should be placed in a 
safety box directly after use. Safety boxes and other infectious waste can be 
disposed of on-site by burial, incineration or other safe methods (cid:15)see Health 
systems standard 1, guidance note 11 on page (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16).

5.  Market  waste:  Most  market  waste  can  be  treated  in  the  same  way  as 
domestic refuse. Slaughterhouse and (cid:196)sh-market waste may need special 

119

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

treatment and facilities to deal with the liquid waste produced and to ensure 
that slaughtering is carried out in hygienic conditions and in compliance with 
local laws. Slaughter waste can often be disposed of in a large covered pit 
next to the abattoir or (cid:196)sh processing plant. (cid:41)lood, etc., can be run from the 
abattoir or (cid:196)sh processing plant into the pit through a slab-covered channel 
(cid:15)which should help reduce (cid:197)y access to the pit(cid:16). Water should be made avail-
able for cleaning purposes.

6.  Controlled tipping and/or sanitary landﬁll: Large-scale disposal of waste 
should  be  carried  out  off-site  through  either  controlled  tipping  or  sanitary 
land(cid:196)ll.  This  method  is  dependent  upon  suf(cid:196)cient  space  and  access  to 
mechanical e(cid:88)uipment. Ideally, waste that is tipped should be covered with 
earth at the end of each day to prevent scavenging and vector breeding. 

7.  Staff  welfare:  (cid:40)ll  involved  in  the  collection,  transport,  disposal  and  recy-
cling  of  solid  waste  should  be  provided  with  protective  clothing,  including 
at minimum gloves but ideally overalls, boots and protective masks. When 
necessary,  immunisation  against  tetanus  and  hepatitis  (cid:41)  should  also  be 
provided. Water and soap should be available for hand and face washing. 
Staff who come into contact with medical waste should be informed of the 
correct methods of storage, transport and disposal and the risks associated 
with improper management of the waste.

8.  Management  of  dead  bodies:  The  management  and/or  burial  of  dead 
bodies from natural disasters should be dealt with in an appropriate and 
digni(cid:196)ed  manner.  It  is  usually  handled  by  search  and  recovery  teams,  in 
coordination  with  responsible  government  agencies  and  authorities.  The 
burial of people who have died due to communicable diseases also needs 
to  be  managed  appropriately  and  in  consultation  and  coordination  with 
health  authorities  (cid:15)see  Health  systems  standard  1,  guidance  note  1(cid:25)  on 
page  (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16).  Further  information  on  how  to  deal  with  appropriate  burial  of 
dead  bodies  can  be  obtained  from  the  materials  in  the  References  and 
further reading section.

120

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

7. Drainage

Surface water in or near settlements may come from household and water point 
wastewater, leaking toilets and sewers, rainwater or rising (cid:197)oodwater. The main 
health risks associated with surface water are contamination of water supplies 
and the living environment, damage to toilets and dwellings, vector breeding, and 
drowning. Rainwater and rising (cid:197)oodwaters can worsen the drainage situation in a 
settlement and further increase the risk of contamination. (cid:40) proper drainage plan, 
addressing stormwater drainage through site planning and wastewater disposal 
using small-scale, on-site drainage, should be implemented to reduce potential 
health  risks  to  the  disaster-affected  population.  This  section  addresses  small-
scale drainage problems and activities. Large-scale drainage is generally deter-
mined by site selection and development (cid:15)see Shelter and settlement standard (cid:25), 
guidance note (cid:28) on page (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:16).

Drainage standard 1: Drainage work 

People have an environment in which health risks and other risks 
posed by water erosion and standing water, including stormwater, 
(cid:197)oodwater,  domestic  wastewater  and  wastewater  from  medical 
facilities, are minimised.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Provide  appropriate  drainage  facilities  so  that  dwelling  areas  and  water 
distribution points are kept free of standing wastewater and that stormwater 
drains are kept clear (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16). 

 »

Seek  an  agreement  with  the  affected  population  on  how  to  deal  with  the 
drainage  problem  and  provide  suf(cid:196)cient  numbers  of  appropriate  tools  for 
small  drainage  works  and  maintenance  where  necessary  (see  guidance 
note 4). 

 »

Ensure  that  all  water  points  and  hand  washing  facilities  have  effective 
drainage to prevent muddy conditions (see guidance note 2).

121

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Water  point  drainage  is  well  planned,  built  and  maintained.  This  includes 
drainage from washing and bathing areas as well as water collection points 
and hand washing facilities (see guidance notes 2 and 4).

 »

 »

There  is  no  pollution  of  surface  water  and/or  groundwater  sources  from 
drainage water (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16). 

Shelters, paths and water and sanitation facilities are not (cid:197)ooded or eroded 
by water (see guidance notes 2–4). 

 »

There is no erosion caused by drainage water (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Guidance notes 
1.  Site selection and planning:  The  most  effective  way  to  control  drainage 
problems is in the choice of site and the layout of the settlement (see Shelter 
and settlement standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages (cid:25)(cid:27)9(cid:182)(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:16). 

2.  Wastewater: Sullage or domestic wastewater is classi(cid:196)ed as sewage when 
mixed with human excreta. Unless the settlement is sited where there is an 
existing  sewerage  system,  domestic  wastewater  should  not  be  allowed  to 
mix with human excreta. Sewage is dif(cid:196)cult and more expensive to treat than 
domestic wastewater. (cid:40)t water points and washing and bathing areas, the 
creation of small gardens to utilise wastewater should be encouraged where 
possible.  Special  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  prevent  wastewater  from 
washing and bathing areas contaminating water sources. 

3.  Drainage and excreta disposal: Special care is needed to protect toilets 
and sewers from (cid:197)ooding in order to avoid structural damage and leakage. 

4.  Promotion: It is essential to involve the affected population in providing small-
scale drainage works as they often have good knowledge of the natural (cid:197)ow 
of drainage water and of where channels should be. (cid:40)lso, if they understand 
the health and physical risks involved and have assisted in the construction 
of the drainage system, they are more likely to maintain it (cid:15)see (cid:61)ector control 
section on page 111). Technical support and tools may then be needed. 

5.  On-site  disposal:  Where  possible,  and  if  favourable  soil  conditions  exist, 
drainage from water points, washing areas and hand washing points should 
be on-site rather than via open channels, which are dif(cid:196)cult to maintain and 
often clog. Simple and cheap techniques such as soak pits or the planting of 
banana trees can be used for on-site disposal of wastewater. Where off-site 
disposal is the only possibility, channels are preferable to pipes. Channels 
should be designed both to provide (cid:197)ow velocity for dry-weather sullage and 
to carry stormwater. Where the slope is more than (cid:28) per cent, engineering 

122

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

techniques must be applied to prevent excessive erosion. Drainage of resid-
uals from any water treatment processes should be carefully controlled so 
that people cannot use such water and it does not contaminate surface or 
groundwater sources.

123

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 1
Water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion  
initial needs assessment checklist

This  list  of  (cid:88)uestions  is  primarily  for  use  to  assess  needs,  identify  indigenous 
resources and describe local conditions. It does not include questions to deter-
mine  external  resources  needed  in  addition  to  those  immediately  and  locally 
available.

1 General
 » How many people are affected and where are they? Disaggregate the data 

as far as possible by sex, age, disability, etc.

 » What are people’s likely movements? What are the security factors for the 

affected population and for potential relief responses?

 » What  are  the  current,  prevalent  or  possible  water-  and  sanitation-related 

diseases? What is the likely extent and expected evolution of problems?

 » Who are the key people to consult or contact?

 » Who are the vulnerable people in the population and why?

 »

Is there e(cid:88)ual access for all to existing facilities including at public places, 
health centres and schools?

 » What special security risks exist for women, girls and vulnerable people(cid:38)

 » What  water  and  sanitation  practices  were  the  population  accustomed  to 

before the disaster?

 » What are the formal and informal power structures (cid:15)e.g. community leaders, 

elders, women(cid:187)s groups(cid:16)(cid:38)

 » How are decisions made in households and in the community?

124

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

2 Hygiene promotion
 » What  water  and  sanitation  practices  were  the  population  accustomed  to 

before the disaster?

 » What practices are harmful to health, who practises these and why(cid:38)

 » Who still practises positive hygiene behaviour and what enables and moti-

vates them to do this?

 » What are the advantages and disadvantages of any proposed changes in 

practice?

 » What are the existing formal and informal channels of communication and 
outreach (cid:15)community health workers, traditional birth attendants, traditional 
healers, clubs, cooperatives, churches, mos(cid:88)ues, etc.(cid:16)(cid:38)

 » What access to the mass media is there in the area (cid:15)radio, television, video, 

newspapers, etc.(cid:16)(cid:38) 

 » What  local  media  organisations  and/or  non-governmental  organisations 

(NGOs) are there?

 » What  segments  of  the  population  need  to  be  targeted  (cid:15)mothers,  children, 

community leaders, community kitchen workers, etc.(cid:16)(cid:38)

 » What type of outreach system would work in this context (cid:15)volunteers, health 
clubs, committees, etc.(cid:16) for both immediate and medium-term mobilisation(cid:38)

 » What are the learning needs of hygiene promotion staff and volunteers?

 » What non-food items are available and what are the most urgent based on 

preferences and needs? 

 » How effective are hygiene practices in health facilities (particularly important 

in epidemic situations)? 

3 Water supply
 » What is the current water supply source and who are the present users? 

 » How much water is available per person per day?

 » What is the daily/weekly frequency of the water supply availability?

 »

 »

 »

Is the water available at the source suf(cid:196)cient for short-term and longer-term 
needs for all groups in the population?

Are water collection points close enough to where people live? Are they safe?

Is the current water supply reliable? How long will it last?

125

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 » Do people have enough water containers of the appropriate size and type?

 »

 »

 »

 »

Is the water source contaminated or at risk of contamination (microbiological 
or chemical/radiological)? 

Is there a water treatment system in place? Is treatment necessary? Is treat-
ment possible? What treatment is necessary? 

Is disinfection necessary, even if the supply is not contaminated(cid:38)

Are there alternative sources of water nearby?

 » What  traditional  beliefs  and  practices  relate  to  the  collection,  storage  and 

use of water?

 »

 »

 »

Are there any obstacles to using available water supply sources?

Is it possible to move the population if water sources are inadequate?

Is it possible to tanker water if water sources are inadequate?

 » What are the key hygiene issues related to water supply?

 » Do people have the means to use water hygienically?

 »

In  the  event  of  rural  displacement,  what  is  the  usual  source  of  water  for 
livestock?

 » Will there be any environmental effects due to possible water supply interven-

tion, abstraction and use of water sources(cid:38)

 » What  other  users  are  currently  using  the  water  sources?  Is  there  a  risk  of 

con(cid:197)ict if the sources are utilised for the new populations(cid:38)

4 Excreta disposal
 » What is the current defecation practice(cid:38) If it is open defecation, is there a 

designated area? Is the area secure? 

 » What are current beliefs and practices, including gender-speci(cid:196)c practices, 

concerning excreta disposal?

 »

 »

(cid:40)re there any existing facilities(cid:38) If so, are they used, are they suf(cid:196)cient and 
are they operating successfully? Can they be extended or adapted?

Is  the  current  defecation  practice  a  threat  to  water  supplies  (surface-  or 
groundwater) or living areas and to the environment in general? 

 » Do  people  wash  their  hands  after  defecation  and  before  food  preparation 

and eating? Are soaps or other cleansing materials available?

 »

Are people familiar with the construction and use of toilets? 

126

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

 » What local materials are available for constructing toilets?

 »

 »

(cid:40)re people prepared to use pit latrines, defecation (cid:196)elds, trenches, etc.(cid:38)

Is there suf(cid:196)cient space for defecation (cid:196)elds, pit latrines, toilets, etc.(cid:38)

 » What is the slope of the terrain?

 » What is the level of the groundwater table?

 »

Are soil conditions suitable for on-site excreta disposal?

 » Do current excreta disposal arrangements encourage vectors?

 »

Are  there  materials  or  water  available  for  anal  cleansing?  How  do  people 
normally dispose of these materials?

 » How do women manage issues related to menstruation? Are there appro-

priate materials or facilities available for this?

 »

(cid:40)re  there  any  speci(cid:196)c  facilities  or  e(cid:88)uipment  available  for  making  sanita-
tion accessible for persons with disabilities or people immobile in medical 
facilities?

 » What environmental consideration should be assessed? 

5 Vector-borne diseases
 » What are the vector-borne disease risks and how serious are they? 

 »

 »

 »

 »

(cid:40)re there traditional beliefs and practices (cid:15)for example, the belief that malaria 
is caused by dirty water) that relate to vectors and vector-borne disease? Are 
any of these beliefs or practices either useful or harmful?

If vector-borne disease risks are high, do people at risk have access to indi-
vidual protection?

Is it possible to make changes to the local environment (cid:15)by drainage, scrub 
clearance,  excreta  disposal,  refuse  disposal,  etc.(cid:16)  to  discourage  vector 
breeding?

Is it necessary to control vectors by chemical means(cid:38) What programmes, 
regulations and resources exist for vector control and the use of chemicals?

 » What information and safety precautions need to be provided to households?

6 Solid waste management
 »

Is accumulated solid waste a problem?

127

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 » How do people dispose of their waste? What type and quantity of solid waste 

is produced?

 » Can solid waste be disposed of on-site or does it need to be collected and 

disposed of off-site?

 » What is the normal practice of solid waste disposal for the affected popula-

tion (cid:15)compost and(cid:22)or refuse pits, collection system, bins, etc.(cid:16)(cid:38)

 »

Are  there  medical  facilities  and  activities  producing  waste?  How  is  this 
disposed of? Who is responsible?

 » Where  are  menstrual  pads  disposed  of  and  is  their  disposal  discreet  and 

effective?

 » What is the effect of the current solid waste disposal on the environment?

7 Drainage
 »

Is  there  a  drainage  problem,  e.g.  (cid:197)ooding  of  dwellings  or  toilets,  vector 
breeding sites, polluted water contaminating living areas or water supplies(cid:38)

 »

Is the soil prone to water logging? 

 » Do people have the means to protect their dwellings and toilets from local 

(cid:197)ooding(cid:38)

 »

Are water points and bathing areas well drained?

128

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

Appendix 2 
Minimum water quantities for institutions  
and other uses

Health centres and 
hospitals

(cid:28) litres per outpatient
40–60 litres per inpatient per day
Additional quantities may be needed for laundry 
e(cid:88)uipment, (cid:197)ushing toilets, etc.

Cholera centres

60 litres per patient per day
1(cid:28) litres per carer per day

Therapeutic feeding 
centres

(cid:26)(cid:23) litres per inpatient per day
1(cid:28) litres per carer per day

Reception/transit 
centres

Schools

Mosques

Public toilets

(cid:40)ll (cid:197)ushing toilets

1(cid:28) litres per person per day if stay is more than 
one day
(cid:26) litres per person per day if stay is limited to 
day-time

(cid:26) litres per pupil per day for drinking and hand 
washing
(Use for toilets not included: see Public toilets 
below)

(cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:28) litres per person per day for washing and 
drinking

1–2 litres per user per day for hand washing
2–8 litres per cubicle per day for toilet cleaning 

20–40 litres per user per day for conventional 
(cid:197)ushing toilets connected to a sewer
(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:28) litres per user per day for pour-(cid:197)ush toilets

Anal washing

1–2 litres per person per day

Livestock

(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:23) litres per large or medium animal per day
(cid:28) litres per small animal per day

129

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 3
Minimum numbers of toilets at public places and 
institutions in disaster situations

Institution

Short term

Long term

Market areas

1 toilet to (cid:28)(cid:23) stalls

1 toilet to 20 stalls

Hospitals/medical 
centres

1 toilet to 20 beds or  
(cid:28)(cid:23) outpatients

1 toilet to 10 beds or  
20 outpatients

Feeding centres

1 toilet to (cid:28)(cid:23) adults  
1 toilet to 20 children 

1 toilet to 20 adults  
1 toilet to 10 children

Reception/transit 
centres

1 toilet to (cid:28)(cid:23) individuals;  
(cid:26):1 female to male 

Schools

Of(cid:196)ces

1 toilet to (cid:26)(cid:23) girls  
1 toilet to 60 boys

1 toilet to (cid:26)(cid:23) girls  
1 toilet to 60 boys

1 toilet to 20 staff

Source: Adapted from Harvey, Baghri and Reed (2002) 

130

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

Appendix 4
Water- and excreta-related diseases and transmission 
mechanisms

Water-borne or 
water-washed

Cholera, shigellosis, 
diarrhoea, salmonellosis, etc.

Typhoid, paratyphoid, etc.

(cid:40)moebic dysentery, 
giardiasis

Hepatitis (cid:40), poliomyelitis,  
rotavirus, diarrhoea

Faecal-oral 

bacterial

Faecal-oral 
non-bacterial

Water contamination

Poor sanitation

Poor personal hygiene

Crop contamination

Water-washed 
or water-scarce

Skin and eye infections

Louse-borne typhus and 
louse-borne relapsing fever

Inadequate water

Poor personal hygiene

Excreta-related 

helminths

Roundworm, hookworm, 
whipworm etc.

Soil-transmitted 

helminths

Open defecation

Ground contamination

Beef and pork 

tapeworms

Taeniasis

Man–animal

Half-cooked meat

Ground contamination

Water-based

Schistosomiasis,  
Guinea worm, 
clonorchiasis, etc.

Long stay in 
infected water Water contamination

Water-related 
insect vector

Malaria, dengue, sleeping 
sickness, (cid:196)lariasis, etc.

Biting by 

mosquitoes, 

ﬂies

Bite near water 

Breed near water

Excreta-related 
insect vectors

(cid:43)iarrhoea, dysentery

Transmitted 
by ﬂies and 
cockroaches

Dirty environment

131

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 5
Minimum hygiene, sanitation and isolation activities 
for cholera treatment centres (CTCs)

Essential principles that all health facilities and CTCs must follow: 

Isolate severe cases 

1. 
2.  Contain all excreta (faeces and vomit)
(cid:26).  Have only one carer per patient 
4.  Wash hands with chlorinated water 
(cid:28).  (cid:40)ll (cid:197)oors must be washable 
6.  Disinfect feet when leaving the centre 
7.  Disinfect clothes of infected people before leaving the centre (by boiling 

or disinfection)

8.  Provide regular cleaning of (cid:197)oors and all areas of the centre 
9.  Provide separate toilets and bathing areas for patients and carers 
10.  Prepare food in the centre. If brought from outside, food should be trans-
ferred from container at the gate to prevent the container taking cholera-
causing micro-organisms (vibrio) out of the centre after use

11.  Follow up on the families and relatives of the patient, ensure there are no 

other cases. Disinfect the house and give hygiene information

12.  If people arrive by public transport, disinfect the vehicles 
1(cid:26).  Contain and treat run-off from rain and wastewater within the isolation 

camp area

14.  Treat waste within the isolation camp area.

Chlorine solutions for CTCs

Chlorine % for 
different uses

2% solution

0.2% solution

0.05% solution

Waste and 
excreta
Dead bodies

Floor
Objects / beds
Footbaths
Clothes

Hands 
Skin

NB: The solutions should be freshly prepared every day, since light and heat weaken the solution

132

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

Appendix 6
Household water treatment and storage decision tree

Is the source contaminated? 

YES

NO

Provide safe water

storage and handling

Are you using commercial water treatment 
products in the humanitarian response?

NO

YES

Pre-treatment:  Is the water 

muddy or cloudy?

Is the water muddy?

NO

YES

YES

NO

Promote straining, 

Promote (cid:197)occulation 

settling and 
decanting,  

three-pot method, 
or simple (cid:196)lters with 
frequent cleaning

(cid:22)disinfection; or 
promote simple 
(cid:196)ltration, settling 
and decanting or 
three-pot method, 
followed by double 

dose of chlorine. Also 
promote safe water 
storage and handling

Disinfection: Is wood or another 
heat source readily available?

Is the water cloudy?

NO

YES

YES

NO

Promote solar 

disinfection. Also 
promote safe water 
storage and handling

Promote boiling and 
safe water storage 
and handling. Also 
promote responsible 

wood collection 
and reforestation

Promote (cid:196)ltration 
(cid:15)biosand, colloidal 
silver ceramic (cid:196)lters, 
etc.) or use a double 

dose of chemical 
disinfection. Also 
promote safe water 

storage and 

handling

Promote (cid:196)ltration 
(cid:15)biosand, colloidal 
silver ceramic (cid:196)lters, 
etc.) or use a normal 

dose of chemical 

disinfection.
Also promote 

safe water

storage and handling 

Source: Adapted from IFRC (2008), Household water treatment and safe storage in emergencies manual.

133

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

References and  
further reading 
Sources

International legal instruments
The Right to Water (cid:15)articles 11 and 1(cid:25) of the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights(cid:16), CESCR, General Comment 1(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29) November (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25). 
(cid:60)N (cid:43)oc. E(cid:22)C.1(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:22)11. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.

General 
(cid:43)avis, (cid:49) and Lambert, R (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16), Engineering in Emergencies: (cid:40) Practical Guide 
for Relief Workers. Second Edition. RedR/IT Publications. London. 
Inter-(cid:40)gency  Network  for  Education  in  Emergencies  (cid:15)INEE(cid:16)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Minimum 
Standards for Education in Emergencies, Chronic Crises and Early Reconstruction. 
New York. www.ineesite.org 
M(cid:116)decins  sans  Fronti(cid:117)res  (cid:15)199(cid:27)(cid:16),  Public  Health  Engineering  in  Emergency 
Situations. First Edition. Paris.
Walden, (cid:61)M, O(cid:187)Reilly, M and (cid:64)etter, M (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Humanitarian Programmes and HI(cid:61) 
and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S; (cid:40) practical approach to mainstreaming. Oxfam G(cid:41). Oxford.
www.oxfam.org.uk(cid:22)what(cid:70)we(cid:70)do(cid:22)emergencies(cid:22)how(cid:70)we(cid:70)work(cid:22)resources(cid:22)health.htm 

Sanitary surveys
(cid:41)ritish Geological Survey (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16), (cid:40)RGOSS manual. London. www.bgs.ac.uk

Gender 
Inter-(cid:40)gency Standing Committee (cid:15)I(cid:40)SC(cid:16) (cid:15)no date(cid:16), Gender and Water, Sanitation 
and Hygiene in Emergencies. IASC Gender Handbook. Geneva. 
www.humanitarianreform.org(cid:22)humanitarianreform(cid:22)Portals(cid:22)1(cid:22)cluster(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)
approach(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)page(cid:22)clusters(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)pages(cid:22)W(cid:40)SH(cid:22)Gender(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)Handbook(cid:70)Wash.pdf

134

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

Hygiene promotion 
(cid:40)lmedom,  (cid:40),  (cid:41)lumenthal,  (cid:60)  and  Manderson,  L  (cid:15)1997(cid:16),  Hygiene  Evaluation 
Procedures:  Approaches  and  Methods  for  Assessing  Water-  and  Sanitation-
Related Hygiene Practices. The International Foundation for Developing Countries. 
Practical (cid:40)ction Publishing. (cid:60)(cid:50). 
Ferron,  S,  Morgan,  (cid:49)  and  O(cid:187)Reilly,  M  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Hygiene  Promotion:  (cid:40)  Practical 
Manual for Relief and (cid:43)evelopment. Practical (cid:40)ction Publishing. (cid:60)(cid:50).
Humanitarian Reform Support Unit. WASH Cluster Hygiene Promotion Project. 
www.humanitarianreform.org/humanitarianreform/Default.aspx?tabid=160

Water supply 
(cid:40)ction against Hunger (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Populations at 
Risk. Paris. www.actioncontrelafaim.org/english/
House,  S  and  Reed,  R  (cid:15)1997(cid:16),  Emergency  Water  Sources:  Guidelines  for 
Selection and Treatment. Water, Engineering and (cid:43)evelopment Centre (cid:15)WE(cid:43)C(cid:16), 
Loughborough (cid:60)niversity. (cid:60)(cid:50).

Water needs for food security
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. FAO Water:  
www.fao.org/nr/water/index.html

Livestock water needs 
LEGS (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards (cid:15)LEGS(cid:16). Practical 
(cid:40)ction Publishing. (cid:60)(cid:50). www.livestock-emergency.net(cid:22)user(cid:196)les(cid:22)(cid:196)le(cid:22)legs.pdf 

Water quality
World Health Organi(cid:97)ation (cid:15)WHO(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16), Guidelines for (cid:43)rinking-Water (cid:56)uality. 
Third Edition. Geneva. 
www.who.int(cid:22)water(cid:70)sanitation(cid:70)health(cid:22)dw(cid:88)(cid:22)guidelines(cid:25)(cid:22)en(cid:22)

Water safety plan
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), Water safety plans: managing drinking-water (cid:88)uality from catchment 
to consumer.
www.who.int(cid:22)water(cid:70)sanitation(cid:70)health(cid:22)dw(cid:88)(cid:22)wsp(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:22)en(cid:22) 

135

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Excreta disposal 
Harvey, P (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Excreta (cid:43)isposal in Emergency, (cid:40)n inter-agency manual.
WE(cid:43)C, Loughborough (cid:60)niversity, (cid:60)(cid:50). http:(cid:22)(cid:22)wedc.lboro.ac.uk(cid:22)

Vector control 
Hunter, P (cid:15)1997(cid:16), Waterborne (cid:43)isease: Epidemiology and Ecology. (cid:49)ohn Wiley (cid:13) 
Sons Ltd. Chichester, (cid:60)(cid:50).
Lacarin, C(cid:49) and Reed, R(cid:40) (cid:15)1999(cid:16), Emergency (cid:61)ector Control (cid:60)sing Chemicals. 
WE(cid:43)C, Loughborough (cid:60)niversity, (cid:60)(cid:50).
Thomson, M (cid:15)199(cid:28)(cid:16), (cid:43)isease Prevention Through (cid:61)ector Control: Guidelines for 
Relief Organisations. Oxfam GB. 

Solid waste 
Centre for appropriate technology (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16), (cid:43)esign of land(cid:196)ll sites. www.lifewater.org
International Solid Waste Association: www.iswa.org 

Management of dead bodies
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  (cid:43)isposal  of  dead  bodies  in  emergency  conditions.  Technical 
Note  for  Emergencies  No.  (cid:31).  Geneva.  http:(cid:22)(cid:22)wedc.lboro.ac.uk(cid:22)resources(cid:22)who(cid:70)
notes(cid:22)WHO(cid:70)TN(cid:70)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:70)(cid:43)isposal(cid:70)of(cid:70)dead(cid:70)bodies.pdf

Medical waste
Pr(cid:133)ss, (cid:40), Giroult, E and Rushbrook, P (cid:15)eds(cid:16) (cid:15)1999(cid:16), Safe Management of Health-
Care Wastes. (Currently under review.) WHO. Geneva.

Drainage
Environmental  Protection  (cid:40)gency 
(cid:15)19(cid:31)(cid:23)(cid:16),  (cid:43)esign  Manual:  On-Site 
Wastewater  Treatment  and  (cid:43)isposal  Systems,  Report  EP(cid:40)-(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:22)(cid:25)-7(cid:31)-17(cid:26). 
Cincinnati, (cid:60)S(cid:40). 

(cid:15)EP(cid:40)(cid:16) 

Further reading

General
WHO  and  Pan  (cid:40)merican  Health  Organi(cid:97)ation  (cid:15)P(cid:40)HO(cid:16),  Health  Library  for 
Disasters: www.helid.desastres.net/en 

136

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   W a t e r   S u p p l y ,   S a n i t a t i o n   a n d   H y g i e n e   P r o m o t i o n

WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16), Environmental health in emergencies and disasters. Geneva.

Excreta disposal
Harvey, P(cid:40), (cid:41)aghri, S and Reed, R(cid:40) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16), Emergency Sanitation, (cid:40)ssessment 
and Programme (cid:43)esign. WE(cid:43)C, Loughborough (cid:60)niversity, (cid:60)(cid:50). 

Vector control
(cid:60)NHCR (cid:15)1997(cid:16), (cid:61)ector and Pest Control in Refugee Situations. Geneva. 
Warrell, (cid:43) and Gilles, H (cid:15)eds(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16), Essential Malariology. Fourth Edition. (cid:40)rnold. 
London.
WHO,  Chemical  methods  for  the  control  of  vectors  and  pests  of  public  health 
importance. www.who.int.

Management of dead bodies
P(cid:40)HO  and  WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16),  Management  of  (cid:43)ead  (cid:41)odies  in  (cid:43)isaster  Situations.
(cid:43)isaster Manuals and Guidelines Series, No (cid:28). Washington (cid:43)C. 
www.paho.org/English/DD/PED/ManejoCadaveres.htm

Medical waste
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16), (cid:40)ide-Memoire: Safe Health-Care Waste Management. Geneva.
WHO, Healthcare waste management: www.healthcarewaste.org 
WHO, Injection safety: www.injectionsafety.org 

Disability and general vulnerability
(cid:49)ones,  H  and  Reed,  R  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Water  and  sanitation  for  disabled  people  and 
other  vulnerable  groups:  designing  services  to  improve  accessibility.  WE(cid:43)C, 
Loughborough (cid:60)niversity, (cid:60)(cid:50). http:(cid:22)(cid:22)wedc.lboro.ac.uk(cid:22)wsdp
Oxfam G(cid:41) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Excreta disposal for physically vulnerable people in emergencies. 
Technical  (cid:41)rie(cid:196)ng  Note  1.  Oxfam,  (cid:60)(cid:50).  www.oxfam.org.uk/resources/learning/
humanitarian(cid:22)downloads(cid:22)T(cid:41)N1(cid:70)disability.pdf
Oxfam  G(cid:41)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  (cid:61)ulnerability  and  socio-cultural  considerations  for  PHE 
in  emergencies  Technical  (cid:41)rie(cid:196)ng  Note  (cid:25).  Oxfam,  (cid:60)(cid:50).  www.oxfam.org.uk(cid:22)
resources(cid:22)learning(cid:22)humanitarian(cid:22)downloads(cid:22)T(cid:41)N(cid:25)(cid:70)watsan(cid:70)sociocultural.pdf

137

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

138
138

Minimum Standards  
in Food Security  
and Nutrition

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

How to use this chapter

This chapter is divided into four main sections:

Food security and nutrition assessment
Infant and young child feeding
Management of acute malnutrition and micronutrient deﬁciencies
Food security

The fourth section, food security, is subdivided into three sections: food security – food transfers; 
food security – cash and voucher transfers; and food security – livelihoods.

The Protection Principles and Core Standards must be used consistently with this chapter. 

Although primarily intended to inform humanitarian response to a disaster, the minimum standards 
may also be considered during disaster preparedness and the transition to recovery activities.

Each section contains the following:

  Minimum standards: These are qualitative in nature and specify the minimum levels to be 

attained in humanitarian response regarding the provision of food and nutrition.

 

 

 

Key actions: These are suggested activities and inputs to help meet the standards.

Key indicators: These are ‘signals’ that show whether a standard has been attained. They 
provide a way of measuring and communicating the processes and results of key actions; they 
relate to the minimum standard, not to the key action.

Guidance notes: These include speciﬁc points to consider when applying the minimum stan-
dards, key actions and key indicators in different situations. They provide guidance on tackling 
practical difﬁculties, benchmarks or advice on priority issues. They may also include critical 
issues relating to the standards, actions or indicators, and describe dilemmas, controversies 
or gaps in current knowledge.

If the required key indicators and actions cannot be met, the resulting adverse implications for the 
affected population should be appraised and appropriate mitigating actions taken.

Appendices include checklists for assessments, guidance on measuring acute malnutrition and 
determining the public health signiﬁcance of micronutrient deﬁciencies and nutritional requirements. 
A  select  list  of  references,  which  points  to  sources  of  information  on  both  general  issues  and 
speciﬁc technical issues and is divided into source material and further reading, is also provided.

140

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143

1. Food security and nutrition assessment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150

2. Infant and young child feeding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158

3. Management of acute malnutrition and micronutrient deﬁciencies  . . . . . . . . . 164

4. Food security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175

4.1. Food security – food transfers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179

4.2. Food security – cash and voucher transfers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199

4.3. Food security – livelihoods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .203

Appendix 1:  Food security and livelihoods assessment checklists . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214

Appendix 2:  Seed security assessment checklist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216

Appendix 3:  Nutrition assessment checklist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218

Appendix 4:  Measuring acute malnutrition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .220

Appendix 5:  Measures of the public health signiﬁcance of micronutrient 

deﬁciencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224

Appendix 6:  Nutritional requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .227

References and further reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .231

141

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Humanitarian 

Charter

Protection 
Principles

Core  

Standards

Food security and nutrition

Food security 
and nutrition 
assessment 

Infant and young 

child feeding 

Management of 
acute malnutrition 
and micronutrient 

deﬁciencies

Standard 1
Food security

Standard 2
Nutrition

Standard 1
Policy guidance 
and coordination

Standard 1
Moderate acute 
malnutrition

Standard 2
Basic and 
skilled support 

Standard 2
Severe acute 
malnutrition 

Food security – 
food transfers

Food security 

Standard 1
General food 
security 

Food security – 

 cash and 

voucher transfers

Food security – 

 livelihoods

Standard 3
Micronutrient 
de(cid:196)ciencies

Standard 1
General nutrition 
requirements 

Standard 1
Access to available 
goods and services

Standard 1
Primary 
production 

Standard 2
Income and 
employment

Standard 3
Access to markets 

Standard 2
Appropriateness 
and acceptability

Standard 3
Food quality 
and safety

Standard 4
Supply chain 
management (SCM)

Standard 5
Targeting and 
distribution

Standard 6
Food use

Appendix 1: Food security and livelihoods assessment checklists
Appendix 2: Seed security assessment checklist
Appendix 3: Nutrition assessment checklist
Appendix 4: Measuring acute malnutrition
Appendix 5: Measures of the public health signi(cid:196)cance of micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies
Appendix 6: Nutritional requirements

References and further reading

142

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Introduction
Links to the Humanitarian Charter and international law

The minimum standards for food security and nutrition are a practical expres-
sion of the shared beliefs and commitments of humanitarian agencies and the 
common principles, rights and duties governing humanitarian action set out in 
the Humanitarian Charter. Founded on the principle of humanity, and re(cid:197)ected 
in international law, these principles include the right to life with dignity, the right 
to  protection  and  security,  and  the  right  to  receive  humanitarian  assistance 
on the basis of need. A list of key legal and policy documents that inform the 
Humanitarian Charter is available for reference in (cid:40)nnex 1 (cid:15)see page (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:16), with 
explanatory comments for humanitarian workers.

(cid:40)lthough states are the main duty-bearers with respect to the rights set out above, 
humanitarian  agencies  have  a  responsibility  to  work  with  the  disaster-affected 
population in a way that is consistent with these rights. From these general rights 
(cid:197)ow a number of more speci(cid:196)c entitlements, including the rights to participation, 
information and non-discrimination that form the basis of the Core Standards as 
well as the speci(cid:196)c rights to water, food, shelter and health that underpin these 
and the minimum standards in this Handbook.

Everyone has the right to adequate food. This right is recognised in international 
legal instruments and includes the right to be free from hunger. When individ-
uals or groups are unable, for reasons beyond their control, to enjoy the right to 
ade(cid:88)uate food by the means at their disposal, states have the obligation to ensure 
that right directly. The right to food implies the following obligations for states:

 »

 »

 »

‘To respect existing access to adequate food’ requires states parties not to 
take any measure that results in the prevention of such access.

‘To protect’ requires measures by the state to ensure that enterprises or indi-
viduals do not deprive individuals of access to adequate food.

(cid:186)To  ful(cid:196)l(cid:187)  (cid:15)facilitate(cid:16)  means  that  states  must  proactively  engage  in  activities 
intended to strengthen people’s access to and utilisation of resources and 
means to ensure their livelihoods, including food security.

143

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

In  the  case  of  disasters,  states  should  provide  food  to  those  in  need  or  may 
re(cid:88)uest international assistance if their own resources do not suf(cid:196)ce. They should 
also facilitate safe and unimpeded access for international assistance.

The  Geneva  Conventions  and  additional  protocols  include  the  right  to  access 
to food in situations of armed con(cid:197)ict and occupation. It is prohibited to starve 
civilians as a method of warfare and to attack, destroy, remove or render useless 
foodstuffs,  agricultural  areas  for  the  production  of  foodstuffs,  crops,  livestock, 
drinking water installations and supplies, and irrigation works. When one state 
occupies another by force, international humanitarian law obliges the occupying 
power  to  ensure  adequate  food  for  the  population  and  to  bring  in  necessary 
supplies if the resources of the occupied territory are inadequate. States should 
make every effort to ensure that refugees and internally displaced persons have 
access at all times to adequate food.

The minimum standards in this chapter re(cid:197)ect the core content of the right to food 
and contribute to the progressive realisation of this right globally.

The importance of food security and nutrition  
in disasters

Access  to  food  and  the  maintenance  of  an  adequate  nutritional  status  are 
critical determinants of people’s survival in a disaster (see The place of Sphere 
within humanitarian action on page 9). The people affected are often already 
chronically undernourished when the disaster hits. Undernutrition is a serious 
public health problem and among the lead causes of death, whether directly 
or indirectly.

The  causes  of  undernutrition  are  complex.  The  conceptual  framework  (see 
page 146) is an analytical tool that shows the interaction between contributing 
factors  to  undernutrition.  The  immediate  causes  of  undernutrition  are  disease 
and(cid:22)or inade(cid:88)uate food intake, which result from underlying poverty, household 
food  insecurity,  inade(cid:88)uate  care  practices  at  household  or  community  levels, 
poor  water,  hygiene  and  sanitation,  and  insuf(cid:196)cient  access  to  healthcare. 
(cid:43)isasters such as cyclones, earth(cid:88)uakes, (cid:197)oods, con(cid:197)ict and drought all directly 
affect the underlying causes of undernutrition. The vulnerability of a household 
or community determines its ability to cope with exposure to these shocks. The 
ability to manage the associated risks is determined largely by the characteristics 
of a household or community, particularly its assets and the coping and livelihood 
strategies it pursues.

144

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

For this chapter the following de(cid:196)nitions are used:

 »

Food security exists when all people, at all times, have physical, social and 
economic access to suf(cid:196)cient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary 
needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life. Within this de(cid:196)ni-
tion of food security, there are three components:

 - (cid:40)vailability refers to the (cid:88)uantity, (cid:88)uality and seasonality of the food supply 
in the disaster-affected area. It includes local sources of production (agri-
culture,  livestock,  (cid:196)sheries,  wild  foods(cid:16)  and  foods  imported  by  traders 
(government  and  agencies’  interventions  can  affect  availability).  Local 
markets able to deliver food to people are major determinants of availability.
 - (cid:40)ccess refers to the capacity of a household to safely procure suf(cid:196)cient 
food  to  satisfy  the  nutritional  needs  of  all  its  members.  It  measures  the 
household’s  ability  to  acquire  available  food  through  a  combination  of 
home production and stocks, purchases, barter, gifts, borrowing or food, 
cash and/or voucher transfers.

 - (cid:60)tilisation refers to a household(cid:187)s use of the food to which it has access, 
including storage, processing and preparation, and distribution within the 
household. It is also an individual’s ability to absorb and metabolise nutri-
ents, which can be affected by disease and malnutrition.

 »

Livelihoods comprise the capabilities, assets (cid:15)including natural, material and 
social resources) and activities used by a household for survival and future 
well-being. Livelihood strategies are the practical means or activities through 
which  people  use  their  assets  to  earn  income  and  achieve  other  livelihood 
goals. Coping strategies are de(cid:196)ned as temporary responses forced by food 
insecurity.  A  household’s  livelihood  is  secure  when  it  can  cope  with  and 
recover from shocks, and maintain or enhance its capabilities and productive 
assets.

 » Nutrition is a broad term referring to processes involved in eating, digestion 
and utilisation of food by the body for growth and development, reproduction, 
physical activity and maintenance of health. The term ‘malnutrition’ technically 
includes  undernutrition  and  over-nutrition.  Undernutrition  encompasses  a 
range  of  conditions,  including  acute  malnutrition,  chronic  malnutrition  and 
micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies. (cid:40)cute malnutrition refers to wasting (cid:15)thinness(cid:16) and(cid:22)
or nutritional oedema, while chronic malnutrition refers to stunting (cid:15)shortness(cid:16). 
Stunting and wasting are two forms of growth failure. In this chapter, we refer 
to undernutrition and revert to malnutrition speci(cid:196)cally for acute malnutrition.

145

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Conceptual framework of the causes of undernutrition

Short-term 
consequences

Morbidity, mortality, 

disability

Maternal 
and child 

undernutrition

Long-term 

consequences

(cid:40)dult si(cid:97)e, 
intellectual 

ability, economic 

productivity, 
reproductive 
performance, 
metabolic and 
cardiovascular 

disease

Inadequate  
dietary intake

Immediate  
causes

Disease

Household food 

insecurity  

(cid:40)ccess, availability, 

consumption

Inadequate 

maternal intake, 
poor infant and 

young child feeding, 
and impaired care 
practices, growth

Unhealthy 
household 

environment and 
inadequate health 

services

Poor livelihood 

strategies  

Income poverty:

employment, 

self-employment, 
dwelling, assets, 

remittances, 

pensions, transfers

Insuf(cid:196)cient livelihood 

assets: (cid:196)nancial, 
human, physical, 
social, natural and 

political

Underlying  
causes

Basic  
causes

t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i
v
n
e
 
l
a
c
i
t
i
l

 

o
p
d
n
a
 
l
a
r
u
t
l
u
c
 
,
c
m
o
n
o
c
e
 
,
l
a
c
o
S

i

i

y
t
i
l

a
n
o
s
a
e
s
 
,
s
d
n
e
r
t
 
,
s
k
c
o
h
S

146

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

The framework shows that exposure to risk is determined by the frequency and 
severity  of  natural  and  man-made  shocks  and  by  their  socio-economic  and 
geographical scope. The determinants of coping capacity include the levels of 
a  household(cid:187)s  (cid:196)nancial,  human,  physical,  social,  natural  and  political  assets; 
the  levels  of  its  production,  income  and  consumption;  and  its  ability  to  diver-
sify  its  income  sources  and  consumption  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  the  risks.

The vulnerability of infants and young children means that addressing their nutri-
tion should be a priority. Prevention of undernutrition is as important as treatment 
of  acute  malnutrition.  Food  security  interventions  may  determine  nutrition  and 
health in the short term and their survival and well-being in the long term.

Women  often  play  a  greater  role  in  planning  and  preparation  of  food  for  their 
households. Following a disaster, household livelihood strategies may change. 
Recognising distinct roles in family nutrition is key to improving food security at 
the household level. Understanding the unique nutritional needs of pregnant and 
lactating  women,  young  children,  older  people  and  persons  with  disabilities  is 
also important in developing appropriate food responses.

Better food security and nutrition disaster response is achieved through better 
preparedness. Such preparedness is the result of the capacities, relationships and 
knowledge developed by governments, humanitarian agencies, local civil society 
organisations, communities and individuals to anticipate and respond effectively 
to the impact of likely, imminent or current ha(cid:97)ards. Preparedness is based on 
an analysis of risks and is well linked to early warning systems. It includes contin-
gency planning, stockpiling of e(cid:88)uipment and supplies, emergency services and 
stand-by arrangements, communications, information management and coordi-
nation arrangements, personnel training and community-level planning, drills and 
exercises.

The main areas of intervention for food security and nutrition in disasters covered 
in this Handbook are infant and young child feeding; the management of acute 
malnutrition  and  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies;  food  transfers;  cash  and  voucher 
transfers; and livelihoods.

Links to other chapters

Many of the standards in the other chapters are relevant to this chapter. Progress 
in achieving standards in one sector often in(cid:197)uences progress in other sectors. 
For  an  intervention  to  be  effective,  close  coordination  and  collaboration  are 
re(cid:88)uired with other sectors. Coordination with local authorities, other responding 
agencies and community-based organisations is also necessary to ensure that 

147

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

needs are met, that efforts are not duplicated and that the (cid:88)uality of food security 
and nutrition interventions is optimised.

The  conceptual  framework  for  undernutrition  (cid:15)see  page  1(cid:27)(cid:29)(cid:16)  identi(cid:196)es  poor 
household  environment  and  inadequate  health  services  among  the  underlying 
causes of malnutrition. Responses to prevent and correct malnutrition require the 
achievement of minimum standards both in this chapter and in the W(cid:40)SH, Shelter 
and Health chapters. They also require that the Core Standards be achieved and 
the Protection Principles addressed. In order to ensure food security and nutrition 
of all groups in a manner that ensures their survival and upholds their dignity, it 
is not suf(cid:196)cient to achieve only the standards in this chapter of the Handbook.

Reference is made, where relevant, to speci(cid:196)c standards or guidance notes in 
other chapters and to companion and complementary standards.

Links to the Protection Principles and Core Standards

In  order  to  meet  the  standards  of  this  Handbook,  all  humanitarian  agencies 
should be guided by the Protection Principles, even if they do not have a distinct 
protection  mandate  or  specialist  capacity  in  protection.  The  Principles  are  not 
‘absolute’:  it  is  recognised  that  circumstances  may  limit  the  extent  to  which 
agencies  are  able  to  ful(cid:196)l  them.  Nevertheless,  the  Principles  re(cid:197)ect  universal 
humanitarian concerns which should guide action at all times.

The  Core  Standards  are  essential  process  and  personnel  standards  shared 
by  all  sectors.  The  six  core  standards  cover  people-centred  humanitarian 
response;  coordination  and  collaboration;  assessment;  design  and  response; 
performance,  transparency  and  learning;  and  aid  worker  performance.  They 
provide a single reference point for approaches that underpin all other standards 
in the Handbook. Each technical chapter, therefore, re(cid:88)uires the companion use 
of the Core Standards to help attain its own standards. In particular, to ensure 
the  appropriateness  and  (cid:88)uality  of  any  response,  the  participation  of  disaster-
affected people – including the groups and individuals most frequently at risk in 
disasters – should be maximised.

Vulnerabilities and capacities of disaster-affected 
populations

This  section  is  designed  to  be  read  in  conjunction  with,  and  to  reinforce,  
the Core Standards. 

148

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

It is important to understand that to be young or old, a woman or an individual with 
a disability or HI(cid:61), does not, of itself, make a person vulnerable or at increased 
risk. Rather, it is the interplay of factors that does so: for example, someone who 
is over 7(cid:23) years of age, lives alone and has poor health is likely to be more vulner-
able than someone of a similar age and health status living within an extended 
family and with suf(cid:196)cient income. Similarly, a (cid:26)-year-old girl is much more vulner-
able if she is unaccompanied than if she were living in the care of responsible 
parents.

(cid:40)s  food  security  and  nutrition  standards  and  key  actions  are  implemented,  a 
vulnerability  and  capacity  analysis  helps  to  ensure  that  the  disaster  response 
effort  supports  those  who  have  a  right  to  assistance  in  a  non-discriminatory 
manner and who need it most. This requires a thorough understanding of the 
local  context  and  of  how  a  particular  crisis  impacts  on  particular  groups  of 
people in different ways due to their pre-existing vulnerabilities (e.g. being very 
poor or discriminated against(cid:16), their exposure to various protection threats (cid:15)e.g. 
gender-based violence including sexual exploitation(cid:16), disease incidence or preva-
lence  (cid:15)e.g.  HI(cid:61)  or  tuberculosis(cid:16)  and  possibilities  of  epidemics  (cid:15)e.g.  measles  or 
cholera(cid:16). (cid:43)isasters can make pre-existing ine(cid:88)ualities worse. However, support 
for  people(cid:187)s  coping  strategies,  resilience  and  recovery  capacities  is  essential. 
Their  knowledge,  skills  and  strategies  need  to  be  supported  and  their  access 
to  social,  legal,  (cid:196)nancial  and  psychosocial  support  advocated  for.  The  various 
physical, cultural, economic and social barriers they may face in accessing these 
services in an equitable manner also need to be addressed.

The following highlight some of the key areas that will ensure that the rights and 
capacities of all vulnerable people are considered:

 » Optimise people(cid:187)s participation, ensuring that all representative groups are 
included,  especially  those  who  are  less  visible  (cid:15)e.g.  individuals  who  have 
communication  dif(cid:196)culties,  mobility  dif(cid:196)culties,  those  living  in  institutions, 
stigmatised youth and other under- or unrepresented groups).

 » Disaggregate data by sex and age (0–80+ years) during assessment – this is 
an important element in ensuring that the food security and nutrition sector 
adequately considers the diversity of populations.

 »

Ensure that the right to information on entitlements is communicated in a way 
that is inclusive and accessible to all members of the community.

149

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The minimum standards

1. Food security and nutrition 

assessment

In an acute crisis and for immediate response, multisector initial rapid assess-
ments  may  be  suf(cid:196)cient  to  decide  whether  or  not  immediate  assistance  is 
required. Initial rapid assessments are designed to obtain a fast and clear vision 
of a speci(cid:196)c context in time. There will likely be a need to carry out further, more 
in-depth  food  security  and  nutrition  assessments  which  require  considerable 
time and resources to undertake properly. (cid:40)ssessment is a continuous process, 
particularly in protracted crises, and should inform targeting and decision-making 
as part of response management.

Ideally,  food  security  and  nutrition  assessments  should  overlap  and  strive  to 
identify the barriers to ade(cid:88)uate nutrition, as well as interventions to improve avail-
ability, access and optimal utilisation of food intake. (cid:40)ssessment checklists are 
provided in (cid:40)ppendices 1: Food security and livelihoods assessment checklists, 
(cid:25): Seed security assessment checklist and (cid:26): Nutrition assessment checklist.

The two food security and nutrition assessment standards follow on from Core 
Standard (cid:26) (cid:15)see page (cid:29)1(cid:16) and both apply wherever food security and nutrition 
interventions are planned or are advocated.

Food security and nutrition assessment standard 1:  
Food security

Where people are at increased risk of food insecurity, assessments 
are  conducted  using  accepted  methods  to  understand  the  type, 
degree and extent of food insecurity, to identify those most affected 
and to de(cid:196)ne the most appropriate response.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Use  a  methodology  which  adheres  to  widely  accepted  principles  and 
describe it comprehensively in the assessment report (see guidance note 1).

150

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

 » Collect and analyse information at the initial stage of the assessment (see 

guidance note 2).

 »

 »

Analyse the impact of food insecurity on the population’s nutritional status 
(see guidance note 4).

(cid:41)uild  the  assessment  upon  local  capacities,  including  formal  and  informal 
institutions, wherever possible (cid:15)see guidance note 9(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Food  security  and  livelihoods  of  individuals,  households  and  communities 
are investigated to guide interventions (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)9(cid:16).

 »

 »

(cid:40)ssessment (cid:196)ndings are synthesised in an analytical report including clear 
recommendations of actions targeting the most vulnerable individuals and 
groups (see guidance notes 1–10).

The  response  is  based  on  people’s  immediate  food  needs  but  will  also 
consider the protection and promotion of livelihood strategies (see guidance 
note 10).

Guidance notes
1.  Methodology:  The  scope  of  assessments  and  sampling  procedures  are 
important, even if informal. Food security assessments should have clear 
objectives  and  use  internationally  accepted  methods.  Con(cid:196)rmation  via 
different  sources  of  information  (cid:15)e.g.  crop  assessments,  satellite  images 
and household assessments) is vital to have a consistent conclusion (see 
Core Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1 and References and further reading(cid:16).

2.  Sources of information: Secondary information may exist about the pre-
disaster situation. As women and men have different and complementary 
roles in securing the nutritional well-being of the household, this information 
should be disaggregated by sex as much as possible (see Core Standard 
(cid:26) on page (cid:29)1 and (cid:40)ppendix 1: Food security and livelihoods assessment 
checklists).

3.  Food availability, access, consumption and utilisation: (cid:15)See de(cid:196)nitions 
for food availability, access and utilisation on page 1(cid:27)(cid:28).(cid:16) Food consumption 
re(cid:197)ects  the  energy  and  nutrient  intake  of  individuals  in  households.  It  is 
not practical to measure actual energy content and nutrient details during 
these  assessments.  Changes  in  the  number  of  meals  consumed  before 
and after a disaster can be a simple yet revealing indicator of changes in 
food  security.  The  number  of  food  groups  consumed  by  an  individual  or 
household  and  frequency  of  consumption  over  a  given  reference  period 
re(cid:197)ect  dietary  diversity.  This  is  a  good  proxy  indicator,  especially  when 

151

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

correlated  with  a  household’s  socio-economic  status  and  also  with  total 
food energy intake and diet quality. Tools that can give robust measures 
on food consumption patterns and problems include seasonal calendars, 
the Household (cid:43)ietary (cid:43)iversity Score, Household Food Insecurity (cid:40)ccess 
Scale or Food Consumption Score.

4.  Food  insecurity  and  nutritional  status:  Food  insecurity  is  one  of  three 
underlying  causes  of  undernutrition.  However,  it  should  not  be  assumed 
that this is the sole cause of undernutrition.

5.  Context:  Food  insecurity  may  be  the  result  of  wider  macro-economic 
and  structural  socio-political  factors,  including  national  and  international 
policies,  processes  or  institutions  that  have  an  impact  on  the  disaster-
affected  population’s  access  to  nutritionally  adequate  food  and  on  the 
degradation  of  the  local  environment.  This  is  usually  de(cid:196)ned  as  chronic 
food insecurity, a long-term condition resulting from structural vulnerabili-
ties that may be aggravated by the impact of disaster. Local and regional 
food security information systems, including famine early warning systems 
and the Integrated Food Security Phase Classi(cid:196)cation, are important mech-
anisms to analyse information.

6.  Response analysis: Food security varies according to people(cid:187)s livelihoods, 
their location, the market systems, their access to area markets, their social 
status (cid:15)including sex and age(cid:16), the time of year, the nature of the disaster and 
the  associated  responses.  The  focus  of  the  assessment  should  address 
how the affected population acquired food and income before the disaster 
and  how  they  cope  now.  Where  people  have  been  displaced,  the  food 
security of the host population must be taken into account. The assess-
ment  should  also  analyse  markets,  banks,  (cid:196)nancial  institutions  or  other 
local transfer mechanisms in the case of cash transfers, and food supply 
chains, including the risks associated with them (cid:15)see Protection Principle 
1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16). This will help assess the feasibility of cash or food transfer 
interventions and the design of safe and ef(cid:196)cient delivery mechanisms.

7.  Market analysis should be part of the initial and subsequent assessments. 
(cid:40)n  analysis  of  markets  should  include  price  trends,  availability  of  basic 
goods and services, the impact of the disaster on market structures and 
the  expected  recovery  period.  Understanding  the  capacity  of  markets  to 
provide employment, food, essential items and services after a disaster can 
help the design of timely, cost-effective and appropriate responses that can 
improve local economies. Market systems can go beyond short-term needs 
after a disaster to protect livelihoods by supplying productive items (cid:15)seeds, 
tools, etc.(cid:16) and maintaining demand for employment. Programmes should 
be designed to support local purchase where possible (see Food security 

152

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

(cid:182) food transfers standard (cid:27), guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26) on page 1(cid:31)9, Food security 
(cid:182) livelihoods standard 1, guidance note 7 on page (cid:25)(cid:23)7 and Food security (cid:182) 
livelihoods standard (cid:26), guidance note (cid:25) on page (cid:25)1(cid:25)(cid:16).

8.  Coping strategies: Assessment and analysis should consider the different 
types of coping strategy, who is applying them and when, how well they 
work and the nature of adverse impact (if any). Tools such as the Coping 
Strategies Index are recommended. While strategies vary, there are distinct 
stages of coping. Some coping strategies are normal, positive and could 
be  supported.  Other  strategies,  sometimes  called  crisis  strategies,  may 
permanently undermine future food security (cid:15)sale of land, distress migra-
tion of whole families or deforestation). Some coping strategies employed 
by  or  forced  on  women  and  girls  may  signi(cid:196)cantly  and  adversely  impact 
upon their health, psychological well-being and social integration. Coping 
strategies  may  also  affect  the  environment,  such  as  over-exploitation  of 
commonly  owned  natural  resources.  Analysis  should  determine  a  liveli-
hood threshold to identify the most appropriate combination of responses 
which  ensure  that  food  security  is  protected  and  supported  before  all 
non-damaging  options  are  exhausted  (see  Protection  Principles  1–2  on 
pages (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16).

9.  Participatory  analysis  of  vulnerability:  Meaningful  participation  of 
different  groups  of  women  and  men  and  appropriate  local  organisations 
and  institutions  at  all  stages  of  the  assessment  is  vital.  Programmes 
should  build  on  local  knowledge,  be  based  on  need  and  tailored  to  the 
local context. Areas subject to recurrent natural disasters or long-running 
con(cid:197)icts may have local early warning and emergency response systems 
or networks and contingency plans which should be incorporated into any 
assessment. It is critical to engage women in project design and implemen-
tation (cid:15)see Protection Principles (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:27) on pages (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:27)1(cid:16).

10.  Immediate  needs  and  long-term  planning:  Interventions  which  aim 
to  meet  immediate  food  needs  can  include  food  transfers  and  cash  and 
voucher  transfers.  These  can  be  either  stand-alone  or  in  combination 
with  other  livelihoods  interventions.  While  meeting  immediate  needs  and 
preserving  productive  assets  will  be  the  priority  at  the  onset  of  a  crisis, 
responses must always be planned with the longer term in mind, including 
an awareness of the impact of climate change on the environmental resto-
ration of a degraded environment.

153

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Food security and nutrition assessment standard 2: Nutrition

Where people are at increased risk of undernutrition, assessments 
are  conducted  using  internationally  accepted  methods  to  under-
stand the type, degree and extent of undernutrition and identify those 
most affected, those most at risk and the appropriate response.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Compile  existing  information  from  pre-disaster  and  initial  assessments 
to highlight the nature and severity of the nutrition situation (see guidance 
notes 1–6).

 »

Identify groups with the greatest nutritional support needs and the underlying 
factors that potentially affect nutritional status (see guidance notes 1–2).

 » Determine  if  population-level  qualitative  or  quantitative  assessments  are 
needed  to  better  measure  and  understand  anthropometric  status,  micro-
nutrient status, infant and young child feeding, maternal care practices and 
associated potential determinants of undernutrition (see guidance notes 1–2).

 » Consider the opinions of the local community and other local stakeholders 

on the potential determinants of undernutrition (see guidance note 7).

 »

Include an assessment of national and local capacity to lead and/or support 
response (see guidance notes 1 and 8).

 » Use nutrition assessment information to determine if the situation is stable or 

declining (see guidance notes 7–8).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Assessment and analysis methodologies including standardised indicators 
adhering to widely accepted principles are adopted for both anthropometric 
and non-anthropometric assessments (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

 »

(cid:40)ssessment  (cid:196)ndings  are  presented  in  an  analytical  report  including  clear 
recommendations of actions targeting the most vulnerable individuals and 
groups (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Contextual information: Information on the causes of undernutrition can be 
gathered from primary or secondary sources, including existing health and 
nutrition pro(cid:196)les, research reports, early warning information, health centre 

154

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

records, food security reports and community groups. Where information is 
not available for speci(cid:196)c areas of assessment or potential intervention, other 
sources  should  be  consulted  such  as  (cid:43)emographic  Health  Surveys,  Multi 
Indicator Cluster Surveys, other national health and nutrition surveys, WHO 
Nutrition  Landscape  Information  System,  WHO  (cid:61)itamin  and  Mineral  Nutri-
tion Information System, Complex Emergency (cid:43)atabase (cid:15)CE-(cid:43)(cid:40)T(cid:16), Nutrition 
in Crisis Information System (cid:15)NICS(cid:16), national nutrition surveillance systems, 
and admission rates and coverage in existing programmes for the manage-
ment of malnutrition. Where representative data are available, it is preferable 
to  look  at  trends  in  nutritional  status  over  time  rather  than  the  prevalence 
of malnutrition at a single point in time (cid:15)see (cid:40)ppendix (cid:26):  Nutrition assess-
ment checklist). Nutrition assessment should be considered within broader 
assessments, especially those focusing on public health and food security.
Information  on  existing  nutrition  initiatives,  their  operational  capacity  and 
local and national response capacity should be gathered in order to identify 
gaps and guide response.

2.  Scope  of  analysis:  In-depth  assessment  should  be  conducted  following 
the initial assessment (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1(cid:16) only where informa-
tion gaps have been identi(cid:196)ed and where further information is needed to 
inform  programme  decision-making,  to  measure  programme  outcomes  or 
for advocacy purposes. In-depth nutrition assessment refers to a number of 
possible  assessment  approaches  including  anthropometric  surveys,  infant 
and  young  child  feeding  assessments,  micronutrient  surveys  and  causal 
analyses. Nutrition surveillance and monitoring systems may also be used.

3.  Methodology: Nutrition assessments of any type should have clear objec-
tives, use internationally accepted methods, identify nutritionally vulnerable 
individuals  and  create  an  understanding  of  factors  that  may  contribute  to 
undernutrition.  The  assessment  and  analysis  process  should  be  docu-
mented and presented in a timely report in a logical and transparent manner.
(cid:40)ssessment approaches need to be impartial, representative and well coor-
dinated among agencies and governments so information is complementary, 
consistent and comparable. Multi-agency assessments may be bene(cid:196)cial in 
assessing large-scale multi-technical and wide geographical areas.

4.  Anthropometric surveys are representative cross-sectional surveys based 
on  random  sampling  or  exhaustive  screening.  Anthropometric  surveys 
provide an estimate of the prevalence of malnutrition (chronic and acute). They 
should report primarily Weight for Height in (cid:65) score according to WHO stan-
dards (cid:15)see (cid:40)ppendix (cid:27): Measuring acute malnutrition(cid:16). Weight for Height in (cid:65) 
score according to the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) reference 
may also be reported to allow comparison with past surveys. Wasting and 
severe wasting measured by mid upper arm circumference (MUAC) should 

155

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

be included in anthropometric surveys. Nutrition oedema should be assessed 
and recorded separately. Con(cid:196)dence intervals for the prevalence of malnutri-
tion  should  be  reported  and  survey  quality  assurance  demonstrated.  This 
can be done through the use of existing tools (e.g. Standardised Monitoring 
and  Assessment  of  Relief  and  Transitions  (SMART)  methodology  manual 
and tools, or EN(cid:40) (cid:15)Emergency Nutrition (cid:40)ssessment(cid:16) software and EpiInfo 
software). The most widely accepted practice is to assess malnutrition levels 
in  children  aged  (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9  months  as  a  proxy  for  the  population  as  a  whole. 
However, where other groups may be affected to a greater extent or face 
greater  nutritional  risk,  assessment  should  be  considered  (cid:15)see  (cid:40)ppendix 
4: Measuring acute malnutrition).

5.  Non-anthropometric indicators: Additional information to anthropometry 
is essential, though should be carefully considered and remain limited when 
attached to anthropometric surveys so as not to undermine the quality of the 
survey. Such indicators include immunisation coverage rates (especially for 
measles(cid:16), (cid:61)itamin (cid:40) supplementation, micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies and WHO 
infant and young child feeding (cid:15)I(cid:64)CF(cid:16) indicators. Crude, infant and under-(cid:28) 
death rates may be measured, where appropriate.

6.  Micronutrient deﬁciencies: If the population is known to have been de(cid:196)-
cient in (cid:61)itamin (cid:40), iodine or (cid:97)inc or suffering from iron de(cid:196)ciency anaemia 
prior to a disaster, this will likely be exacerbated by the disaster. There may 
be outbreaks of pellagra, beriberi, scurvy or other micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies 
which should be considered when planning and analysing assessments. If 
individuals with any of these de(cid:196)ciencies are present at health centres, it is 
likely to indicate lack of access to an adequate diet and is probably indica-
tive of a population-wide problem. (cid:40)ssessment of micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies 
may  be  direct  or  indirect.  Indirect  assessment  involves  estimating  nutrient 
intakes at the population level and extrapolating de(cid:196)ciency risk by reviewing 
available data on food access, availability and utilisation (cid:15)see Food security 
and nutrition assessment standard 1 on page 1(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:16), and by assessing food 
ration adequacy (see Food security – food transfers standard 1 on page 180). 
(cid:43)irect assessment, where feasible, involves measuring clinical or sub-clinical 
de(cid:196)ciency in individual patients or a population sample, e.g. the measure-
ment  of  haemoglobin  during  surveys  whereby  the  prevalence  of  anaemia 
may be used as a proxy measure of iron de(cid:196)ciency.

7. 

Interpreting  levels  of  undernutrition:  Determining  whether  levels  of 
undernutrition require intervention requires detailed analysis of the situation 
in the light of the reference population si(cid:97)e and density, and morbidity and 
mortality rates (cid:15)see Essential health services standard 1, guidance note (cid:26) 
on page (cid:26)1(cid:23)(cid:16). It also re(cid:88)uires reference to health indicators, seasonal (cid:197)uc-
tuations,  I(cid:64)CF  indicators,  pre-disaster  levels  of  undernutrition,  levels  of 

156

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies (cid:15)see (cid:40)ppendix (cid:28): Measures of the public health 
signi(cid:196)cance  of  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies(cid:16),  the  proportion  of  severe  acute 
malnutrition in relation to global acute malnutrition and other factors affecting 
the underlying causes of undernutrition. A combination of complementary 
information systems may be the most cost-effective way to monitor trends. 
Wherever possible, local institutions and populations should participate in 
monitoring activities, interpreting (cid:196)ndings and planning any responses. The 
application  of  decision-making  models  and  approaches  which  consider 
a  number  of  variables  including  food  security,  livelihoods,  and  health  and 
nutrition may be appropriate (see Food security and nutrition assessment 
standard 1, guidance note (cid:28) on page 1(cid:28)(cid:25)(cid:16).

8.  Decision-making:  (cid:40)ssessment  (cid:196)ndings  should 

inform  decisions  on 
responses  aimed  at  managing  malnutrition.  The  decisions  to  implement 
general food distribution or other preventative or immediate treatment inter-
ventions in the acute phase of a disaster need not await the results of in-depth 
assessments.  Where  assessments  are  conducted,  results  must  inform 
actions. Decision-making should rely on an understanding of undernutrition 
as laid out in the conceptual framework, results from nutrition assessments 
and the existing capacity to respond.

157

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

2. Infant and young child 

feeding

Suboptimal  infant  and  young  child  feeding  practices  increase  vulnerability  to 
undernutrition, disease and death. The risks are heightened in disasters and the 
youngest are most vulnerable. Optimal feeding practices that maximise survival 
and reduce morbidity in children under 24 months are early initiation of exclusive 
breastfeeding,  exclusive  breastfeeding  for  (cid:29)  months,  continued  breastfeeding 
to  (cid:25)(cid:27)  months  or  beyond,  and  introduction  of  ade(cid:88)uate,  appropriate  and  safe 
complementary foods at 6 months.

IYCF (infant and young child feeding) is concerned with interventions to protect 
and support the nutritional needs of both breastfed and non-breastfed infants 
and young children. Priority interventions include breastfeeding protection and 
support, minimising the risks of arti(cid:196)cial feeding and enabling appropriate and 
safe  complementary  feeding.  Infants  and  young  children  in  exceptionally  dif(cid:196)-
cult circumstances, such as HI(cid:61)-prevalent populations, orphans, low birth weight 
(cid:15)L(cid:41)W(cid:16)  infants  and  those  severely  malnourished,  warrant  particular  attention. 
Protection  and  support  of  the  nutritional,  physical  and  mental  health  of  both 
pregnant and breastfeeding women are central to the well-being of the mother 
and child. The particular needs of caregivers who are grandparents, single fathers 
or siblings must be considered. Cross-sector engagement is essential to protect 
and  meet  adequately  and  in  time  the  broader  nutritional  needs  of  infants  and 
young children and their mothers. IYCF is integral to many of the standards in this 
chapter and overlaps in other chapters.

158

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Infant and young child feeding standard 1: Policy guidance 
and coordination

Safe and appropriate infant and young child feeding for the popula-
tion is protected through implementation of key policy guidance and 
strong coordination.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Uphold  the  provisions  of  the  Operational  Guidance  on  infant  feeding  in 
emergencies  (IFE)  and  the  International  Code  of  Marketing  of  Breastmilk 
Substitutes and subsequent relevant World Health Assembly (WHA) resolu-
tions (collectively known as the Code) (see guidance notes 1–2).

 »

(cid:40)void soliciting or accepting donations of breastmilk substitutes (cid:15)(cid:41)MS(cid:16), other 
milk products, bottles and teats (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:25)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

(cid:40) national and(cid:22)or agency policy is in place that addresses I(cid:64)CF and re(cid:197)ects 
the Operational Guidance on IFE (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

A  lead  coordinating  body  on  IYCF  is  designated  in  every  emergency  (see 
guidance note 1).

(cid:40) body to deal with any donations of (cid:41)MS, milk products, bottles and teats 
is designated (see guidance note 2).

 » Code violations are monitored and reported (see guidance notes 1–2).

Guidance notes
1.  Policy guidance, coordination and communication: (cid:50)ey policy guidance 
documents  to  inform  emergency  programmes  include  the  Operational 
Guidance  on  IFE  and  the  Code.  Additional  guidance  can  be  found  in  the 
References and further reading section. WH(cid:40) Resolution (cid:29)(cid:26).(cid:25)(cid:26) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16) urges 
member states to ensure that national and international preparedness plans 
and emergency responses follow the Operational Guidance on IFE. Disaster 
preparedness includes policy development, orientation and training on IFE, 
identifying sources of Code-compliant BMS and of complementary food. A 
lead  coordinating  body  on  IYCF  should  be  assigned  in  every  emergency. 
Monitoring and reporting on Code violations is an important contribution to 
aid accountability. Clear, consistent communication to the affected popula-
tion and in press releases has a critical in(cid:197)uence on the response.

159

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

2.  Handling milk and milk products: Milk and milk products should not be 
included  in  untargeted  distributions  (see  Food  security  –  food  transfers 
standard (cid:25), guidance note (cid:28) on page 1(cid:31)(cid:29)(cid:16). Indications for and management 
of arti(cid:196)cial feeding should be in accordance with the Operational Guidance 
on IFE and the Code, ideally under the guidance of the designated IFE coor-
dinating body. (cid:43)onations of (cid:41)MS, milk products, bottles and teats should not 
be sought or accepted in emergencies. Any donations that do arrive should 
be placed under the control of a designated agency and their management 
determined by the IFE coordinating body.

Infant and young child feeding standard 2: Basic and  
skilled support

Mothers and caregivers of infants and young children have access 
to timely and appropriate feeding support that minimises risks and 
optimises nutrition, health and survival outcomes.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Undertake integrated multisector interventions to protect and support safe 

and appropriate IYCF (see guidance note 1).

 » Give  priority  to  pregnant  and  breastfeeding  women  to  access  food,  cash 
and/or voucher transfers and other supportive interventions (see guidance 
note 1).

 »

 »

 »

 »

Integrate  skilled  breastfeeding  counselling  in  interventions  that  target 
pregnant  and  breastfeeding  women  and  children  aged  0–24  months  (see 
guidance notes 2–7).

Target mothers of all newborns with support for early initiation of exclusive 
breastfeeding (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Support timely, safe, ade(cid:88)uate and appropriate complementary feeding (cid:15)see 
guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Enable  access  for  mothers  and  caregivers  whose  infants  re(cid:88)uire  arti(cid:196)cial 
feeding  to  an  adequate  amount  of  an  appropriate  BMS  and  associated 
support (see guidance note 6).

 » Give special consideration to feeding support of infants and young children 
in  exceptionally  dif(cid:196)cult  circumstances  (cid:15)orphans,  acutely  malnourished 
children, L(cid:41)W infants and those affected by HI(cid:61)(cid:16) (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:27)(cid:182)7(cid:16).

160

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Measurement  of  standard  WHO  indicators  for  early  initiation  of  breast-
feeding, exclusive breastfeeding rate in children (cid:35)(cid:29) months, and continued 
breastfeeding rate at 1 and (cid:25) years (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

 » Caregivers  have  access  to  timely,  appropriate,  nutritionally  ade(cid:88)uate  and 
safe  complementary  foods  for  children  (cid:29)  to  (cid:35)(cid:25)(cid:27)  months  (cid:15)see  guidance 
notes (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

 »

 »

Breastfeeding  mothers  have  access  to  skilled  breastfeeding  support  (see 
guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

There is access to Code-compliant supplies of appropriate BMS and associ-
ated support for infants who re(cid:88)uire arti(cid:196)cial feeding (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Simple measures and basic interventions are needed to create a protec-
tive and supportive environment for IYCF. Be alert to and investigate reports 
of  dif(cid:196)culties  in  breastfeeding,  complementary  feeding  and(cid:22)or  practice  of 
arti(cid:196)cial feeding in children aged (cid:23)(cid:182)(cid:25)(cid:27) months. Non-breastfed infants need 
urgent support. Support should be prioritised for mothers, caregivers and 
pregnant  and  breastfeeding  women  to  meet  immediate  essential  needs.
Households  with  children  under  24  months  and  breastfeeding  mothers  of 
all newborns should be registered and linked to food security programmes 
to  ensure  access  to  adequate  food.  Designated  shelters  for  mothers  and 
caregivers enables access to peer-to-peer and basic IYCF support. Breast-
feeding support should be integrated within key services such as reproduc-
tive health, primary healthcare, psychosocial services and selective feeding 
programmes from the outset.

2.  Pregnant  and  breastfeeding  women:  Inadequate  nutrient  intakes  for 
pregnant and breastfeeding women risk pregnancy complications, maternal 
mortality, L(cid:41)W infants and decline in maternal nutritional status associated 
with  lower  concentrations  of  certain  nutrients  in  breastmilk.  Low  maternal 
body  weight  at  conception  is  strongly  associated  with  infant  LBW  and  is 
a  feature  of  adolescent  pregnancy.  Pregnant  and  breastfeeding  women 
should receive daily supplements providing one daily requirement of multiple 
micronutrients  to  protect  maternal  stores  and  breastmilk  content,  whether 
they  receive  forti(cid:196)ed  rations  or  not.  Iron  and  folic  acid  supplements  when 
already provided should be continued. Women should also receive (cid:61)itamin 
A within six to eight weeks of delivery. Micronutrient supplementation should 
be in accordance with international recommendations on doses and timing. 
Referral to psychosocial services may be needed, especially in traumatised 
populations. Although nutrition support of the adolescent mother is impor-

161

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

tant,  programmes  to  prevent  adolescent  pregnancy  are  likely  to  have  the 
most impact on LBW incidence.

3.  Early initiation of exclusive breastfeeding (within one hour of birth) is a 
priority intervention to safeguard the health of both the mother and the infant. 
L(cid:41)W infants and their mothers will bene(cid:196)t especially from continued skin-to-
skin contact at birth and early initiation of exclusive breastfeeding (see Essen-
tial health services (cid:182) child health standard (cid:25), guidance note 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:16).

4.  Breastfeeding:  Exclusive  breastfeeding  requires  an  infant  to  receive  only 
breastmilk and no water, other li(cid:88)uids or solids, with the exception of neces-
sary micronutrient supplements or medicines. It guarantees food and (cid:197)uid 
security in infants for the (cid:196)rst six months and provides active immune protec-
tion.  (cid:41)reastfeeding  also  protects  older  infants  and  children,  especially  in 
contexts where water, sanitation and hygiene conditions are lacking, so is 
important to sustain to (cid:25)(cid:27) months or beyond. Mothers, families, communities 
and health workers should be reassured of the resilience of breastfeeding; 
con(cid:196)dence  can  be  undermined  by  acute  emergency  situations.  Planning 
and  resource  allocation  should  allow  for  skilled  breastfeeding  support  in 
managing more dif(cid:196)cult situations including stressed populations and acutely 
malnourished infants under 6 months (see Management of acute malnutri-
tion  and  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies  standard  (cid:25)  on  page  1(cid:29)9(cid:16),  populations 
where mixed feeding is common, and infant feeding in the context of HI(cid:61) (cid:15)see 
guidance note 7).

5.  Complementary feeding is the process of giving other food in addition to 
breastmilk from the age of 6 months (or to an appropriate breastmilk substi-
tute  in  non-breastfed  infants).  During  the  complementary  feeding  period 
(cid:15)(cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:25)(cid:27)  months(cid:16),  breastfeeding  continues  to  signi(cid:196)cantly  contribute  to  food 
and (cid:197)uid security. Non-breastfed infants need support to make up the nutri-
tional shortfall. Links with food security programmes are essential to support 
complementary  feeding.  Where  a  population  is  dependent  on  food  aid,  a 
suitable micronutrient-forti(cid:196)ed food should be included in the general ration; 
blanket provision of complementary food may be needed. Clear criteria for 
the inclusion, use and duration of lipid-based nutrient supplements during 
the  complementary  feeding  period  are  needed  for  different  emergency 
contexts.  Ready-to-use  therapeutic  foods  are  not  a  complementary  food. 
Distribution of complementary food should be accompanied with practical 
guidance and demonstration on their preparation. The use of micronutrient 
supplementation,  including  (cid:61)itamin  (cid:40),  should  be  in  accordance  with  the 
latest recommendations. L(cid:41)W infants and young children may bene(cid:196)t from 
iron  supplementation.  If  the  population  is  in  a  malaria-endemic  area,  iron 
supplementation should be targeted to children who are anaemic and iron 
de(cid:196)cient with appropriate malaria control measures.

162

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

6.  Artiﬁcial  feeding:  Infants  who  are  not  breastfed  re(cid:88)uire  early  identi(cid:196)ca-
tion and assessment by skilled personnel to explore feeding options. Where 
maternal breastfeeding is not available, donor breastmilk, particularly as wet 
nursing, has a valuable role, especially in feeding young and L(cid:41)W infants. 
Where arti(cid:196)cial feeding is indicated, mothers and caregivers need assured 
access to adequate amounts of an appropriate BMS for as long as is neces-
sary  (until  infants  are  at  least  6  months  old)  as  well  as  to  the  associated 
essential supports (cid:15)water, fuel, storage facilities, growth monitoring, medical 
care, time(cid:16). Infants under (cid:29) months who are mixed fed should be supported 
to  move  to  exclusive  breastfeeding.  Feeding  bottles  should  not  be  used 
due  to  dif(cid:196)culties  in  cleaning.  Programmes  that  support  arti(cid:196)cial  feeding 
should monitor the community’s IYCF practices using standard indicators to 
ensure that breastfeeding is not undermined. Morbidity surveillance should 
be conducted at individual and population levels, with a particular focus on 
diarrhoea. Low-dose supplemental (cid:61)itamin (cid:40) should be considered for non-
breastfed infants under 6 months.

7.  HIV  and  infant  feeding:  Maximising  the  survival  of  HI(cid:61)-free  children  is  a 
primary consideration in determining the best feeding option for infants born 
to HI(cid:61)-infected mothers. Mothers of unknown or negative HI(cid:61) status should 
be supported to breastfeed as per general IYCF recommendations for popu-
lations (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16). For HI(cid:61)-infected mothers, combining anti-
retroviral (cid:15)(cid:40)R(cid:61)(cid:16) interventions with breastfeeding can signi(cid:196)cantly reduce post-
natal  HI(cid:61)  transmission.  (cid:40)ccelerated  access  to  (cid:40)R(cid:61)s  should  be  prioritised 
(see Essential health services – sexual and reproductive health standard 2 on 
page (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:16). The risks to infants associated with replacement feeding are even 
greater under emergency conditions. This means that breastfeeding offers 
the greater likelihood of survival for infants born to HI(cid:61)-infected mothers and 
for survival of HI(cid:61)-infected infants, including where (cid:40)R(cid:61)s are not yet avail-
able. (cid:60)rgent arti(cid:196)cial feeding assistance is needed for infants already estab-
lished on replacement feeding (see guidance note 6).

163

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

3. Management of acute 

malnutrition and 
micronutrient deﬁciencies

(cid:40)cute  malnutrition  and  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies  are  associated  with  an 
increased risk of morbidity and mortality for affected individuals. Therefore, when 
such  prevalence  or  risk  is  high,  it  is  necessary  to  ensure  access  to  services 
which  both  correct  and  prevent  undernutrition.  The  impact  of  these  services 
will be considerably reduced if the underlying causes of undernutrition are not 
addressed simultaneously through other interventions to support health, W(cid:40)SH, 
food transfers and food security.

Moderate acute malnutrition can be addressed in a number of ways. In disas-
ters, supplementary feeding is often the primary strategy for prevention and treat-
ment of moderate acute malnutrition and prevention of severe acute malnutrition. 
This may be blanket or targeted depending on the levels of acute malnutrition, 
vulnerable population groups and risk of an increase in acute malnutrition. The 
indicators  in  Management  of  acute  malnutrition  and  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies 
standard  1  refer  primarily  to  targeted  supplementary  feeding.  While  there  are 
no  de(cid:196)ned  impact  indicators  for  blanket  supplementary  feeding,  monitoring  of 
coverage, acceptability and rations provided are important.

Severe acute malnutrition is addressed through therapeutic care which can be 
delivered  through  a  variety  of  approaches.  Community-based  management  of 
acute  malnutrition  should  be  the  preferred  approach  where  conditions  permit. 
Programmes addressing severe acute malnutrition should encompass commu-
nity mobilisation (cid:15)including effective communication, active case-(cid:196)nding, referral 
and follow-up(cid:16), outpatient treatment for severe acute malnutrition without medical 
complications and inpatient management for those with medical complications 
or young infants. 

Micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies are dif(cid:196)cult to identify in many contexts. While clinical 
signs of severe de(cid:196)ciencies may be easiest to diagnose, the greater burden on 
the  health  and  survival  of  populations  may  be  sub-clinical  de(cid:196)ciencies.  Where 
micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies are known to have been prevalent in the population, 

164

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

it may be assumed that this could be exacerbated by the disaster. These de(cid:196)-
ciencies  should  be  tackled  using  population-wide  interventions  and  individual 
treatment.

Management of acute malnutrition and micronutrient 
deﬁciencies standard 1: Moderate acute malnutrition

Moderate acute malnutrition is addressed.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Establish from the outset clearly de(cid:196)ned and agreed strategies, objectives 
and criteria for set-up and closure of interventions (see guidance note 1).

 » Maximise access and coverage through involvement of the population from 

the outset (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:25) and Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

Base admission and discharge of individuals on assessment against nation-
ally  and  internationally  accepted  anthropometric  criteria  (see  guidance 
notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27) and (cid:40)ppendices (cid:27): Measuring acute malnutrition and (cid:28): Measures 
of the public health signi(cid:196)cance of micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies(cid:16).

Link the management of moderate acute malnutrition to the management of 
severe acute malnutrition and existing health services where possible (see 
guidance notes (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

Provide dry or suitable ready-to-use supplementary food rations unless there 
is a clear rationale for on-site feeding (see guidance note 8).

Investigate and act on the causes of default and poor response (see guidance 
notes (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

(cid:40)ddress  I(cid:64)CF  with  particular  emphasis  on  protecting,  supporting  and 
promoting breastfeeding (see guidance note 7).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
These indicators are primarily applicable to the (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 month age group, although 
others may be part of the programme.

 » More than 90 per cent of the target population is within less than one day’s 
return walk (including time for treatment) of the programme site for dry ration 
supplementary feeding programmes and no more than one hour’s walk for 
on-site supplementary feeding programmes (see guidance note 2).

165

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 » Coverage is (cid:37)(cid:28)(cid:23) per cent in rural areas, (cid:37)7(cid:23) per cent in urban areas and (cid:37)9(cid:23) 

per cent in a camp situation (see guidance note 2).

 »

feeding 
The  proportion  of  discharges 
programmes who have died is (cid:35)(cid:26) per cent, recovered is (cid:37)7(cid:28) per cent and 
defaulted is (cid:35)1(cid:28) per cent (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:27)(cid:16).

from  targeted  supplementary 

Guidance notes
1.  Programme design must be based on an understanding of the complexity 
and dynamics of the nutrition situation. Supplementary feeding can take a 
targeted  or  a  blanket  approach.  The  decision  regarding  which  approach 
to take should depend on levels of acute malnutrition and caseload, risk of 
an increase in acute malnutrition, the capacity to screen and monitor that 
caseload  using  anthropometric  criteria,  available  resources  and  access  to 
the disaster-affected population. Targeted supplementary feeding generally 
requires more time and effort to screen and monitor individuals with acute 
malnutrition but re(cid:88)uires fewer food resources, whereas a blanket approach 
generally  requires  less  staff  expertise  but  more  food  resources.  Effective 
community  mobilisation  will  support  the  population’s  understanding  and 
effectiveness of the programme. Links to therapeutic care, health systems, 
HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S and tuberculosis (cid:15)T(cid:41)(cid:16) networks and food security programmes 
including food, cash or voucher transfers are important. The disaster-affected 
population should be involved in deciding where to locate programme sites. 
Consideration should be given to vulnerable people who may face dif(cid:196)culties 
in accessing sites. Exit strategies or plans for longer-term support should be 
considered from the outset.

2.  Coverage  refers  to  individuals  who  need  treatment  against  those  actually 
receiving  treatment.  Coverage  can  be  affected  by  the  acceptability  of  the 
programme,  location  and  accessibility  of  programme  sites,  security  situ-
ation,  fre(cid:88)uency  of  distributions,  waiting  time,  service  (cid:88)uality,  extent  of  
mobilisation, extent of home visiting and screening, and admission criteria 
alignment. Programme sites should be close to the targeted population in 
order to reduce the risks and costs associated with travelling long distances 
with young children and the risk of people being displaced to them. Method-
ologies to measure coverage vary in the level of reliability and type of infor-
mation generated. The method used must be stated when reporting. Current 
guidance should be consulted when deciding which method is appropriate in 
the given context. Coverage assessment should be seen as a management 
tool so should not be left to the end of an emergency support phase.

3.  Admission criteria: Individuals other than those who meet anthropometric 
criteria  de(cid:196)ning  acute  malnutrition  may  also  bene(cid:196)t  from  supplementary 
feeding,  e.g.  people  living  with  HI(cid:61)  (cid:15)PLHI(cid:61)(cid:16)  or  T(cid:41),  discharges  from  thera-

166

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

peutic  care  to  avoid  relapse,  individuals  with  other  chronic  diseases  or 
persons with disabilities. Monitoring and reporting systems will need to be 
adjusted if individuals falling outside of anthropometric criteria are included.

4.  Discharge criteria should be according to national guidelines, or interna-
tional guidelines where no national guidelines are available, and should be 
speci(cid:196)ed when reporting performance indicators (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

5.  Performance indicators relate to discharged individuals ending treatment. 
The total number of discharged individuals is made up of all who have recov-
ered, died, defaulted or are non-recovered. Individuals who are referred for 
complementary services (such as health services) have not ended the treat-
ment and will either continue treatment or return to continue the treatment 
later. Individuals transferred out to other sites have not ended the treatment 
and should not be included in performance indicators. Performance-related 
indicators are as follows:
Proportion of discharges recovered =

Number of individuals recovered

Total number of discharged

x 100 per cent

Proportion of discharges died =

Number of deaths

Total number of discharged

x 100 per cent

Proportion of discharges defaulted =

Number of defaulters

Total number of discharged

x 100 per cent

Proportion of discharges non-recovered =
Number of individuals non-recovered

Total number of discharged

x 100 per cent

Individuals admitted after being discharged from therapeutic care should be 
reported  as  a  separate  category  in  order  to  avoid  biasing  results  towards 
better recovery. Children with acute malnutrition secondary to disability, cleft 
palate or surgical problems, etc., should not be excluded from programme 
reporting.  When  reporting,  the  core  group  is  children  aged  (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9  months. 
In  addition  to  the  indicators  outlined  above  when  analysing  performance, 
systems  should  monitor  the  population(cid:187)s  participation,  acceptability  of  the 
programme (cid:15)a good measure of this is the default and coverage rate(cid:16), the 
(cid:88)uantity and (cid:88)uality of food being provided, coverage, reasons for transfers 

167

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

to  other  programmes  (particularly  children  whose  nutrition  status  deterio-
rates to severe acute malnutrition) and number of individuals admitted and 
in treatment. External factors should also be considered, such as morbidity 
patterns,  levels  of  undernutrition  in  the  population,  level  of  food  insecurity 
in  households  and  in  the  population,  complementary  interventions  avail-
able  to  the  population  (including  general  food  distributions  or  equivalent 
programmes)  and  the  capacity  of  existing  systems  for  service  delivery. 
Causes of defaulting and failure to adequately respond to treatment should 
be investigated on an ongoing basis.

6.  Health  inputs  and  considerations:  Targeted  supplementary  feeding 
programmes are an important contact point for screening and referring for 
illness. Programmes should take into account the capacity of existing health 
services and ensure effective provision of antihelminthics, (cid:61)itamin (cid:40) supple-
mentation,  iron  and  folic  acid  combined  with  malaria  screening  and  treat-
ment, (cid:97)inc for treatment of diarrhoea and immunisations (cid:15)see Essential health 
services  (cid:182)  control  of  communicable  disease  standard  (cid:25)  on  page  (cid:26)1(cid:27)  and 
Essential health services (cid:182) child health standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages (cid:26)(cid:25)1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:16). In 
areas of high HI(cid:61) prevalence, HI(cid:61) testing and prophylactic treatment should 
be available and the quality and quantity of the supplementary food ration 
should be given special consideration.

7.  Breastfeeding  mothers  of  acutely  malnourished  infants  under  6  months 
should  be  admitted  to  supplementary  feeding,  independent  of  maternal 
nutrition status. Moderately malnourished mothers can successfully breast-
feed  and  need  adequate  nutrition  support  to  protect  their  own  nutritional 
status.  Mothers  should  receive  supplementary  feeding  rations,  skilled 
breastfeeding support on exclusive breastfeeding and advice on safe, nutri-
tious and responsive complementary feeding. Infants under 6 months who 
are acutely malnourished should be referred appropriately for skilled breast-
feeding support and inpatient care as necessary.

8.  Rations: Dry rations or ready-to-use foods provided on a weekly or bi-weekly 
basis are preferred to on-site feeding but their composition and size should 
take into account household food security and the likelihood of sharing.Clear 
information  should  be  given  on  how  to  prepare  and  store  supplementary 
food in a hygienic manner, how and when it should be consumed (cid:15)see Food 
security  (cid:182)  food  transfers  standard  (cid:29),  guidance  note  1  on  page  19(cid:31)(cid:16)  and 
the importance of continued breastfeeding for children under 24 months of 
age. (cid:61)ulnerable people, such as those with mobility challenges, may re(cid:88)uire 
programme adaptations to meet their speci(cid:196)c needs.

168

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Management of acute malnutrition and micronutrient 
deﬁciencies standard 2: Severe acute malnutrition

Severe acute malnutrition is addressed.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Establish  from  the  outset  clearly  de(cid:196)ned  and  agreed  criteria  for  set-up  or 
increased support to existing services and for scale-down or closure (see 
guidance note 1).

 »

Include interventions with inpatient care, outpatient care, referral and popula-
tion mobilisation components for the management of severe acute malnutri-
tion (see guidance note 2).

 » Maximise access and coverage through involvement of the population from 

the outset (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26) and Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

 »

 »

 »

Provide nutritional and medical care according to nationally and internation-
ally recognised guidelines for the management of severe acute malnutrition 
(see guidance notes 4–8).

Ensure  discharge  criteria  include  both  anthropometric  and  non-anthropo-
metric indices (see guidance note 6).

Investigate and act on causes of default and non-response or an increase in 
deaths (see guidance notes 6–7).

(cid:40)ddress  I(cid:64)CF  with  particular  emphasis  on  protecting,  supporting  and 
promoting breastfeeding (see guidance notes 9–10).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
These indicators are primarily applicable to the (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 month age group, although 
others may be part of the programme.

 » More than 90 per cent of the target population is within less than one day’s 

return walk (including time for treatment) of the programme site.

 » Coverage is (cid:37)(cid:28)(cid:23) per cent in rural areas, (cid:37)7(cid:23) per cent in urban areas and (cid:37)9(cid:23) 

per cent in camp situations (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

The proportion of discharges from therapeutic care who have died is (cid:35)1(cid:23) per 
cent, recovered is (cid:37)7(cid:28) per cent and defaulted is (cid:35)1(cid:28) per cent (cid:15)see guidance 
note 6).

169

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Guidance notes
1.  Programme  design:  Programmes  should  be  designed  to  build  on  and 
support  existing  health  system  capacity  wherever  possible.  The  level  of 
additional support required to ensure effective management of severe acute 
malnutrition should be determined based on existing capacity at health facility 
and  community  levels,  the  numbers  and  geographical  spread  of  disaster-
affected individuals and the security situation. From the start, programmes 
should consider exit strategies or plans for longer-term support beyond the 
emergency. Criteria for closure or transition of programmes should consider 
existing capacity and opportunities to integrate into existing systems.

2.  Programme  components:  Programmes  addressing  the  management  of 
severe acute malnutrition should comprise inpatient care for individuals with 
medical complications and all infants (cid:35)(cid:29) months of age with acute malnutri-
tion and decentralised outpatient care for children with no medical compli-
cations.  Inpatient  care  may  be  through  direct  implementation  or  referral.
Programmes  should  also  be  linked  with  other  services  addressing  the 
immediate and underlying causes of undernutrition such as supplementary 
feeding, HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S and T(cid:41) networks, primary health services and food 
security  programmes  including  food,  cash  or  voucher  transfers.  Effective 
community mobilisation will help to achieve programme acceptance, acces-
sibility  and  coverage.  Outpatient  programme  sites  should  be  close  to  the 
targeted population to reduce the risks and costs associated with travelling 
long distances with young children and the risk of people being displaced to 
them.

3.  Coverage: (cid:40)s with moderate acute malnutrition, coverage can be affected by 
the acceptability of the programme, location and accessibility of programme 
sites,  general  security  situation,  fre(cid:88)uency  of  distributions,  waiting  time, 
service (cid:88)uality, extent of mobilisation, extent of home visiting and screening, 
and screening and admission criteria alignment. Methodologies to measure 
coverage vary in the level of reliability and type of information generated. The 
method used must be stated when reporting. Current guidance should be 
consulted when deciding which method is appropriate in the given context 
(cid:15)see  Management  of  acute  malnutrition  and  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies 
standard 1, guidance note (cid:25) on page 1(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:16).

4.  Guidelines: Where national guidelines exist, they should be adhered to. In the 
absence of national guidelines or where they do not reach international stan-
dards, international guidelines should be adopted. Internationally accepted 
guidelines can be found in the References and further reading section.

5.  Admission  criteria  should  be  consistent  with  national  and  international 
guidance  (cid:15)see  (cid:40)ppendix  (cid:27):  Measuring  acute  malnutrition,  and  References 
and  further  reading(cid:16).  (cid:40)dmission  criteria  for  infants  (cid:35)(cid:29)  months  and  groups 

170

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

whose anthropometric status is dif(cid:196)cult to determine should include consid-
eration  of  clinical  and  breastfeeding  status.  Individuals  who  are  tested  or 
suspected to be HI(cid:61)-positive and those who have T(cid:41) or are chronically ill 
should have e(cid:88)ual access to care if they meet the criteria for admission. PLHI(cid:61) 
who do not meet admission criteria often re(cid:88)uire nutritional support, but this 
is not best offered in the context of treatment for severe acute malnutrition in 
disasters. These individuals and their families should be supported through 
a  range  of  services  including  community  home-based  care,  T(cid:41)  treatment 
centres and prevention programmes aimed at mother-to-child transmission.

6.  Discharge criteria and recovery: Discharged individuals must be free from 
medical complications, have regained their appetite and have achieved and 
maintained  appropriate  weight  gain  without  nutrition-related  oedema  (e.g. 
for  two  consecutive  weighings).  Breastfeeding  status  is  especially  impor-
tant for infants under 6 months as well as for children to 24 months. Non-
breastfed  infants  will  need  close  follow-up.  Discharge  criteria  should  be 
adhered to in order to avoid the risks associated with premature discharge. 
Guidelines  de(cid:196)ne  limits  for  the  mean  length  of  stay  for  treatment  and  are 
aimed at avoiding prolonged recovery periods. Mean length of stay will differ 
depending on the guidelines in use and so should be adjusted to national 
context and guidelines in use. Mean weight gain should be calculated sepa-
rately for individuals with and without nutritional oedema. HI(cid:61), (cid:40)I(cid:43)S and T(cid:41) 
may result in some malnourished individuals failing to respond to treatment. 
Options for longer-term treatment or care should be considered in conjunc-
tion with health services and other social and community support services 
(see Essential health services – sexual and reproductive health standard 2 
on page (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:16).

7.  Performance indicators for the management of severe acute malnutrition 
should  combine  inpatient  and  outpatient  care  outcomes  without  double 
counting (i.e. removing transfers between the two components). Where this 
is not possible, interpretation of outcome rates should be adjusted accord-
ingly, for example, programmes should expect better indicators where imple-
menting outpatient care alone and should strive for the indicators as outlined 
for combined care when implementing inpatient care alone. The population 
of discharged individuals for severe acute malnutrition is made up of those 
who  have  recovered,  died,  defaulted,  or  not  recovered  (cid:15)see  Management 
of  acute  malnutrition  and  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies  standard  1,  guidance 
note  4  on  page  167).  Individuals  who  are  referred  to  other  services  (e.g. 
medical services) have not ended treatment. Where programmes report for 
outpatient treatment only, transfers to inpatient care must be reported when 
assessing performance. Factors such as HI(cid:61) clinical complexity will affect 
mortality rates where a proportion of admissions are HI(cid:61) positive. Though 
performance  indicators  have  not  been  adjusted  for  these  situations,  their 

171

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

consideration is essential during interpretation. In addition to discharge indi-
cators, new admissions, number of children in treatment and coverage rates 
should be assessed when monitoring performance. Causes of re-admission, 
deterioration  of  clinical  status,  defaulting  and  failure  to  respond  should  be 
investigated and documented on an ongoing basis. The de(cid:196)nition of these 
should be adapted to guidelines in use.

8.  Health inputs: All programmes for the management of severe acute malnu-
trition should include systematic treatments according to national or interna-
tional guidance and established referral for the management of underlying 
illness such as T(cid:41) and HI(cid:61). In areas of high HI(cid:61) prevalence, strategies to treat 
malnutrition should consider both interventions that seek to avoid HI(cid:61) trans-
mission and those that support maternal and child survival. Effective referral 
systems for T(cid:41) and HI(cid:61) testing and care are essential.

9.  Breastfeeding  support:  Infants  who  are  admitted  for  inpatient  care  tend 
to be among the most unwell. Mothers need skilled breastfeeding support 
as part of nutritional rehabilitation and recovery, particularly for children (cid:35)(cid:29) 
months. Suf(cid:196)cient time and resources should be provided for this (cid:182) a desig-
nated area (breastfeeding corner) to target skilled support and enable peer 
support may help. Breastfeeding mothers of severely malnourished infants 
under 6 months should receive a supplementary ration regardless of their 
nutritional  status  unless  they  meet  the  anthropometric  criteria  for  severe 
acute malnutrition in which case they should also be admitted for treatment.

10.  Social  and  psychosocial  support:  Emotional  and  physical  stimulation 
through play is important for children with severe acute malnutrition during 
the  rehabilitation  period.  Caregivers  of  such  children  often  require  social 
and psychosocial support to bring their children for treatment. This may be 
achieved through mobilisation programmes which should emphasise stimu-
lation and interaction as both treatment and prevention of future disability and 
cognitive impairment (see Protection Principle 4 on page 41). All caregivers of 
severely malnourished children should be enabled to feed and care for their 
children  during  treatment  through  the  provision  of  advice,  demonstrations 
and health and nutrition information.

172

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Management of acute malnutrition and micronutrient 
deﬁciencies standard 3: Micronutrient deﬁciencies

Micronutrient  interventions  accompany  public  health  and  other 
nutrition interventions to reduce common diseases associated with 
emergencies and address micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Train health staff in how to identify and treat micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies (cid:15)see 
guidance notes 1–2).

 »

Establish procedures to respond effectively to the types of micronutrient de(cid:196)-
ciencies from which the population may be at risk (see guidance note 2).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Cases  of  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies  are  treated  according  to  current  best 

clinical practice (see guidance notes 1–2).

 » Micronutrient interventions accompany public health interventions to reduce 
common diseases associated with emergencies such as measles (cid:15)(cid:61)itamin (cid:40)(cid:16) 
and diarrhoea (cid:15)(cid:97)inc(cid:16) (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Diagnosis  and  treatment  of  clinical  micronutrient  deﬁciencies:  Diag-
nosis of some clinical micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies is possible through simple 
examination.  Clinical  indicators  of  these  de(cid:196)ciencies  can  be  incorporated 
into  health  or  nutritional  surveillance  systems,  although  careful  training  of 
staff is re(cid:88)uired to ensure that assessment is accurate. Case de(cid:196)nitions are 
problematic and in emergencies can often only be determined through the 
response to supplementation by individuals who present themselves to health 
staff.  Treatment  of  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies  should  involve  active  case-
(cid:196)nding and the use of agreed case de(cid:196)nitions and guidelines for treatment. 
Case-(cid:196)nding and treatment should take place both within the health system 
and  within  feeding  programmes  (see  Food  security  and  nutrition  assess-
ment standard (cid:25), guidance note (cid:29) on page 1(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:16). Where the prevalence of 
micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies exceeds public health thresholds (cid:15)see (cid:40)ppendix (cid:28): 
Measures  of  the  public  health  signi(cid:196)cance  of  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies(cid:16), 
blanket treatment of the population with supplements may be appropriate. 
Scurvy  (cid:15)(cid:61)itamin  C(cid:16),  pellagra  (cid:15)niacin(cid:16),  beriberi  (cid:15)thiamine(cid:16)  and  aribo(cid:197)avinosis 
(cid:15)ribo(cid:197)avin(cid:16) are the most commonly observed epidemics to result from inad-

173

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

equate  access  to  micronutrients  in  food  aid-dependent  populations.  With 
this is mind, de(cid:196)ciencies should be tackled by population-wide interventions 
as well as individual treatment.

2.  Diagnosis and treatment of sub-clinical micronutrient deﬁciencies: Sub-
clinical  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies  can  have  adverse  health  outcomes  but 
cannot be directly identi(cid:196)ed without biochemical examination. (cid:40)n exception 
is  anaemia,  for  which  a  biochemical  test  is  available  which  can  be  under-
taken relatively easily in the (cid:196)eld (cid:15)see Food security and nutrition assessment 
standard (cid:25), guidance note (cid:29) on page 1(cid:28)(cid:29) and (cid:40)ppendix (cid:28): Measures of the 
public  health  signi(cid:196)cance  of  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies(cid:16).  Indirect  indicators 
can be used to assess the risk of de(cid:196)ciencies in the affected population and 
determine when an improvement in dietary intake or the use of supplements 
may  be  re(cid:88)uired  (cid:15)see  Food  security  and  nutrition  assessment  standard  (cid:25), 
guidance note (cid:29) on page 1(cid:28)(cid:29) and (cid:40)ppendix (cid:28): Measures of the public health 
signi(cid:196)cance of micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies(cid:16).

3.  Prevention:  Strategies  for  the  prevention  of  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies 
are brie(cid:197)y described in the food security (cid:182) food transfers section (cid:15)see Food 
security – food transfers standard 1 on page 180). Prevention also requires 
the  control  of  diseases  such  as  acute  respiratory  infection,  measles  and 
parasitic  infections  such  as  malaria  and  diarrhoea  that  deplete  micronu-
trient stores (see Essential health services – child health standards 1–2 on 
pages  (cid:26)(cid:25)1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:16).  Preparedness  for  treatment  will  involve  the  development 
of  case  de(cid:196)nitions  and  guidelines  for  treatment,  and  systems  for  active 
case-(cid:196)nding.

4.  Use of micronutrients in the treatment of common diseases: Micronutrient 
supplementation  should  be  integrated  in  the  prevention  and  treatment  of 
certain diseases. This includes the provision of (cid:61)itamin (cid:40) supplementation 
alongside  measles  vaccination  and  inclusion  of  zinc  with  oral  rehydration 
salts (ORS) in guidelines to treat diarrhoea (see Essential health services – 
child  health  standards  1(cid:182)(cid:25)  on  pages  (cid:26)(cid:25)1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26)  and  Infant  and  young  child 
feeding standard 2 on page 160).

174

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

4. Food security

Food security responses should aim to meet short-term needs, (cid:186)do no harm(cid:187), 
reduce  the  need  for  the  affected  population  to  adopt  potentially  damaging 
coping strategies and contribute to restoring longer-term food security.

An  accurate  assessment  examines  the  appropriateness  and  feasibility  of  the 
potential response options (see Food security and nutrition assessment standard 
1 on page 1(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:16). The food security responses in this section are grouped into 
standards for general food security, food transfers, cash and voucher transfers, 
and livelihoods responses.

If food is re(cid:88)uired, the appropriate form of transfer should be considered and the 
food basket carefully chosen for both in-kind and voucher transfers. Livelihood 
responses include primary production, income and employment, and access to 
market goods and services.

Cash and voucher transfers may be used for a range of goods or services in 
food security, as well as for other sectors. (cid:60)nderstanding the market capacity 
and the appropriate modality for delivery is critical to designing food security 
interventions.

Food security standards consider the resources to meet the food needs of both 
the general population and speci(cid:196)c vulnerable people at increased nutritional 
risk. (cid:60)ntil these needs are met, any response aimed at the treatment of malnu-
trition will have a limited impact since those who recover from malnutrition will 
return to a context of inadequate food intake and their nutritional status is likely 
to deteriorate again.

Targeting, delivery and distribution methods should reduce the risk of inclusion 
and exclusion errors. This includes the risk that food, cash or other assistance 
is misappropriated by combatants. It is important that food security interven-
tions are not diverted to worsen con(cid:197)icts.

175

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Food security standard 1: General food security

People  have  a  right  to  humanitarian  food  assistance  that  ensures 
their  survival  and  upholds  their  dignity,  and  as  far  as  possible 
prevents the erosion of their assets and builds resilience.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Design initial responses to meet immediate needs (see guidance note 1).

 » Consider  taking  measures  to  support,  protect  and  promote  food  security 

(see guidance note 2).

 »

(cid:41)ase  responses  on  sound  analysis,  their  bene(cid:196)ts,  associated  risks  and 
costs, and people(cid:187)s coping strategies (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 » (cid:43)evelop transition and exit strategies for all responses to disaster, increase 

awareness of them and apply them as appropriate (see guidance note 4).

 »

 »

Ensure  that  bene(cid:196)ciaries  have  access  to  appropriate  support,  including 
providing necessary knowledge, skills and services (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Protect and preserve the natural environment from further degradation in all 
responses (see guidance note 6).

 » Monitor to determine the level of acceptance and access to interventions by 
different groups and individuals and ensure overall coverage of the disaster-
affected population without discrimination (see guidance note 7).

 »

Evaluate to measure the effects of responses on the local economy, social 
networks, livelihoods and the natural environment and ensure the (cid:196)ndings 
are effectively shared and utilised to in(cid:197)uence any further interventions (cid:15)see 
guidance note 8).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

All the disaster-affected people in need of food security responses receive 
assistance that meets their primary needs, prevents erosion of their assets, 
gives them choice and promotes their dignity.

 » Households do not use negative coping strategies (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

The choice of cash, vouchers or a combination of these is based on thorough 
assessment and analysis (see Food security – cash and voucher transfers 
standard 1 on page 200).

176

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Guidance notes
1.  Prioritising life-saving responses: (cid:43)istribution of food, cash or vouchers 
or a combination of these is the most common initial response to acute food 
insecurity.  Other  types  of  response  should  also  be  considered,  including 
food subsidies, temporary fee waivers, employment programmes, productive 
support to livelihoods, destocking, fodder provision and support to markets. 
When markets are functioning and accessible and there are no serious risks 
of in(cid:197)ation, the priority may be to re-establish normal market arrangements 
and  revitalise  economic  activities  that  provide  employment  (see  markets 
and food security interventions sections in References and further reading). 
Such  strategies  could  be  more  appropriate  than  food  distribution  if  they 
offer advantages in supporting livelihoods, reducing future vulnerability and 
upholding dignity. Agencies should take into account what others are doing 
to ensure that the combined response provides inputs and services that are 
complementary.

2.  Support, protect and promote food security: This includes a wide range 
of responses and advocacy. While meeting immediate needs and preserving 
productive assets will be the priority during the initial stages of a disaster, 
responses should be planned with a longer-term perspective and integrated 
with responses from other sectors. In the short term, it may not be feasible 
to achieve food security from people(cid:187)s own livelihood strategies. However, 
existing strategies that contribute to food security and preserve dignity should 
be  supported.  Food  security  responses  should  prevent  further  erosion  of 
assets, lead towards recovery of assets lost through disaster and increase 
resilience to future hazards.

3.  Risks associated with coping strategies: Coping strategies contributing 
to  food  security  and  dignity  should  be  supported.  However,  coping  strat-
egies  may  carry  costs  or  incur  risks  that  increase  vulnerability  (see  Food 
security and nutrition assessment standard 1 on page 1(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:16). The risks must 
be  recognised  as  soon  as  possible  and  early  interventions  undertaken  to 
help people avoid resorting to such strategies. For example, wood distribu-
tion and(cid:22)or fuel-ef(cid:196)cient stoves can avoid overuse of natural resources and 
travel to insecure areas; cash grants can avoid distress sales of assets and 
land (cid:15)see Protection Principle 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).

4.  Exit and transition strategies must be considered from the outset, particu-
larly where the response may have long-term implications, e.g. the provision 
of free services which would normally be paid for, such as veterinary services, 
may make it dif(cid:196)cult to resume paid services. (cid:41)efore closing a programme or 
making the transition to a new phase, there should be evidence of improve-
ment or that other better-placed actors can take responsibility. In the case of 

177

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

food, cash and(cid:22)or voucher transfers, it may mean linking with existing social 
protection or long-term safety-net systems or advocating with governments 
and donors to establish systems that address chronic food insecurity.

5.  Access  to  knowledge,  skills  and  services:  Organisational  structures 
should be designed and planned together with users, so that they are appro-
priate and ade(cid:88)uately maintained, where possible beyond the life of the inter-
vention. Some individuals have very speci(cid:196)c needs, e.g. children orphaned 
as a result of AIDS may miss out on the information and skills transfer that 
takes place within families, which can be provided by appropriate services.

6.  Environmental impact: The natural resource base for production and liveli-
hoods  of  the  disaster-affected  population  (and  host  population)  should  be 
preserved. Impact on the environment should be considered during assess-
ment  and  planning  of  any  response.  For  example,  people  living  in  camps 
re(cid:88)uire cooking fuel, which may accelerate local deforestation; distribution 
of  food  with  long  cooking  times  will  re(cid:88)uire  more  cooking  fuel,  potentially 
affecting the environment (see Food security – food transfers standard 2 on 
page 184). Responses can also help the environment recover from degrada-
tion. For example, destocking reduces pressure on pasture during a drought, 
making  more  gra(cid:97)ing  available  for  surviving  livestock.  Where  possible, 
responses should build the capacity of people to manage natural resources, 
particularly when supplying inputs. The risk of a response causing or exac-
erbating tensions over natural resources, and so fuelling con(cid:197)ict, should be 
appraised and mitigated (cid:15)see Protection Principle 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).

7.  Coverage, access and acceptability: (cid:41)ene(cid:196)ciaries and their characteris-
tics should be assessed and their numbers, disaggregated by sex and age, 
estimated  before  determining  the  level  of  participation  of  different  groups 
(paying particular attention to vulnerable people). Participation is partly deter-
mined by ease of access and the acceptability of activities to participants. 
Even  though  some  food  security  responses  are  targeted  at  the  economi-
cally active, they should not discriminate unfairly and should be accessible 
to vulnerable people and protect dependents, including children. Constraints 
may limit participation, including reduced capacity to work, heavy workload 
at home, pregnancy, feeding and caring for children, and illness and disability. 
Overcoming constraints involves identifying activities within the capacity of 
the groups or setting-up appropriate support structures. Targeting mecha-
nisms based on self-selection should be established after full consultation 
with all groups in the population (cid:15)see Protection Principle (cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16).

8.  Monitoring  and  evaluation:  It  is  necessary  to  monitor  the  wider  food 
security situation in order to assess the continued relevance of an interven-
tion, determine when to phase out speci(cid:196)c activities, introduce modi(cid:196)cations 

178

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

or new projects and identify any need for advocacy. The evaluation should be 
based on established Development Assistance Committee criteria recorded 
by  the  OEC(cid:43),  which  measure  the  following:  appropriateness,  connected-
ness, coherence, coverage, ef(cid:196)ciency, effectiveness and impact.

4.1.  Food security – food transfers

The aim of food transfers is to ensure that people have safe access to food of 
ade(cid:88)uate (cid:88)uality and (cid:88)uantity, and have the means to prepare and consume 
it safely.

General (free) distributions of food are introduced when assessed to be neces-
sary, targeted to those who need the food most, and discontinued when bene(cid:196)-
ciaries have recovered the ability to produce or access their food through other 
means. (cid:41)ene(cid:196)ciaries may re(cid:88)uire a transition to other forms of assistance, such 
as conditional transfers or livelihood responses. Supplementary feeding may be 
needed in addition to any general ration for individuals at risk (e.g. children aged 
(cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 months and pregnant or breastfeeding women(cid:16). This may be blanket or 
targeted depending on the context (see Management of acute malnutrition and 
micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies standard 1 on page 1(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:16).

For  both  general  food  distributions  and  supplementary  feeding,  take-home 
rations  are  provided  wherever  possible.  On-site  feeding  is  undertaken  only 
when people do not have the means to cook for themselves (immediately after a 
disaster or during population movements(cid:16), where insecurity would put recipients 
of take-home rations at risk or for emergency school feeding (though take-home 
rations may be distributed though schools).

Supply chain management (SCM) must be particularly robust and accountable – 
lives can be immediately at stake and food transfers are often a major propor-
tion of disaster response. Delivery and distribution systems should be monitored 
at all stages, including at community level, and transparency though effective 
communication  can  play  a  key  role.  Periodic  evaluations  should  disseminate 
(cid:196)ndings and be discussed with stakeholders, including the affected population 
and local institutions.

179

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Food security – food transfers standard 1:  
General nutrition requirements

Ensure  the  nutritional  needs  of  the  disaster-affected  population, 
including those most at risk, are met.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Use levels of access to adequate quantity and quality of food to determine if 

the situation is stable or is likely to decline (cid:15)see guidance notes 1, (cid:27)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 » Design food transfers on the basis of the standard initial planning requirements 
for energy, protein, fat and micronutrients, adjusted as necessary to the local 
situation  (cid:15)see  key  indicators,  guidance  note  (cid:25)  and  (cid:40)ppendix  (cid:29):  Nutritional 
requirements).

 »

 »

 »

Ensure the population’s access to appropriate nutritious foods and nutritional 
support is protected, promoted and supported (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:31)(cid:16).

Ensure children aged (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:25)(cid:27) months have access to nutritious, energy-dense 
complementary foods and pregnant and breastfeeding women have access 
to additional nutritional support (see guidance note 2).

Ensure  households  with  chronically  ill  members,  including  PLHI(cid:61),  and 
members with speci(cid:196)c impairments or vulnerabilities have access to appro-
priate  nutritious  food  and  adequate  nutritional  support  (see  guidance 
notes 6–8).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

There is ade(cid:88)uate access to a range of foods, including a staple (cid:15)cereal or 
tuber(cid:16), pulses (cid:15)or animal products(cid:16) and fat sources, that together meet nutri-
tional re(cid:88)uirements (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

 »

There  is  adequate  access  to  iodised  salt  for  the  majority  (>90  per  cent) 
of  households  (see  guidance  notes  2–4  and  Appendix  6:  Nutritional 
requirements).

There is ade(cid:88)uate access to additional sources of niacin (cid:15)e.g. pulses, nuts, 
dried  (cid:196)sh(cid:16)  if  the  staple  is  mai(cid:97)e  or  sorghum  (cid:15)see  guidance  notes  (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26)  and 
(cid:40)ppendices  (cid:28):  Measures  of  the  public  health  signi(cid:196)cance  of  micronutrient 
de(cid:196)ciencies and (cid:29): Nutritional re(cid:88)uirements(cid:16).

 »

There is ade(cid:88)uate access to additional sources of thiamine (cid:15)e.g. pulses, nuts, 
eggs(cid:16) if the staple is polished rice (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

180

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

 »

 »

 »

There is ade(cid:88)uate access to ade(cid:88)uate sources of ribo(cid:197)avin where people are 
dependent on a very limited diet (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

There are no cases of scurvy, pellagra, beriberi or ribo(cid:197)avin de(cid:196)ciency (cid:15)see 
guidance note (cid:28) and (cid:40)ppendix (cid:28): Measures of the public health signi(cid:196)cance 
of micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies(cid:16).

The prevalence of (cid:61)itamin (cid:40) de(cid:196)ciency, iron de(cid:196)ciency anaemia and iodine 
de(cid:196)ciency  disorders  are  not  of  public  health  signi(cid:196)cance  (cid:15)see  guidance 
note (cid:28) and (cid:40)ppendix (cid:28): Measures of the public health signi(cid:196)cance of micro-
nutrient de(cid:196)ciencies(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1. 

Interpreting access to food: Access to food can be measured by analyt-
ical  tools  such  as  the  food  consumption  score  or  dietary  diversity  tools.
(cid:40)pproaches  that  consider  a  number  of  variables  including  food  security, 
access  to  markets,  livelihoods,  health  and  nutrition  may  be  appropriate 
to determine if the situation is stable or declining and if food interventions 
are necessary (see Food security and nutrition assessment standard 1 on 
page 1(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:16).

2.  Nutritional  requirements  and  ration  planning:  The  following  estimates 
for  a  population’s  minimum  requirements  should  be  used  for  planning 
general rations, with the (cid:196)gures adjusted for each population as described in 
Appendix 6: Nutritional requirements:

 - (cid:25),1(cid:23)(cid:23) kcals(cid:22)person(cid:22)day
 - 10 per cent of total energy provided by protein
 - 17 per cent of total energy provided by fat
 - adequate micronutrient intake.

General food rations can be designed using ration planning tools (cid:15)e.g. Nut(cid:61)al(cid:16). 
Where people have no access to any food at all, the distributed ration should 
meet their total nutritional requirements. Agreed estimates must be estab-
lished for the average quantities of food accessible to the affected popula-
tion (cid:15)see Food security and nutrition assessment standard 1 on page 1(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:16).
Rations  should  then  be  planned  to  make  up  the  difference  between  the 
nutritional re(cid:88)uirement and what people can provide for themselves. Thus, 
if the standard re(cid:88)uirement is (cid:25),1(cid:23)(cid:23) kcals(cid:22)person(cid:22)day and the assessment 
determines that people within the target population can, on average, ac(cid:88)uire 
(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:23) kcals(cid:22)person(cid:22)day from their own efforts or resources, the ration should 
be designed to provide (cid:25),1(cid:23)(cid:23) (cid:182) (cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:23) (cid:36) 1,(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:23) kcals(cid:22)person(cid:22)day. (cid:40)side from 
the energy content of the diet, consideration of protein, fat and vitamins and 
minerals in food planning is essential.

181

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

If a ration is designed to provide all the energy content of the diet, then it must 
contain adequate amounts of all nutrients. If a ration is intended to provide 
only part of the energy re(cid:88)uirement of the diet, then it can be designed using 
one of two approaches. If the nutrient content of the other foods available 
to the population is unknown, the ration should be designed to provide a 
balanced nutrient content that is proportional to the energy content of the 
ration.  If  the  nutrient  content  of  the  other  foods  available  to  the  popula-
tion is known, the ration may be designed to complement these foods by 
(cid:196)lling  nutrient  gaps.  The  average  planning  (cid:196)gures  for  general  rations  take 
into  account  the  additional  needs  of  pregnant  and  breastfeeding  women. 
Adequate and acceptable food for young children should be included in the 
general  ration,  such  as  forti(cid:196)ed  blended  food  (cid:15)see  Infant  and  young  child 
feeding standard 2 on page 160). Equity should be ensured so that similar 
food  rations  are  provided  to  similarly  affected  populations  and  population 
sub-groups. Planners should be aware that different ration scales in adjacent 
communities may cause tension. Ingestion of excessive amounts of micronu-
trients can be harmful and ration planning needs to consider this especially if 
several different forti(cid:196)ed food products are to be included.

3.  Preventing  acute  malnutrition  and  micronutrient  deﬁciencies:  If  the 
key food indicators are met, then deterioration of the nutrition status of the 
general  population  should  be  prevented,  provided  ade(cid:88)uate  public  health 
measures are also in place to prevent diseases such as measles, malaria and 
parasitic infection (see Essential health services – control of communicable 
diseases standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages (cid:26)1(cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26)1(cid:27)(cid:16). Ensuring the ade(cid:88)uate nutrient 
content of food aid rations may be challenging in situations where there are 
limited  food  types  available.  Options  for  improving  the  nutritional  quality 
of  the  ration  include  forti(cid:196)cation  of  staple  commodities,  inclusion  of  forti-
(cid:196)ed blended foods, inclusion of locally purchased commodities to provide 
missing nutrients and/or use of food supplementation products such as lipid-
based, nutrient-dense, ready-to-use foods or multiple micronutrient tablets or 
powders. These products may be targeted at vulnerable individuals such as 
children aged (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:25)(cid:27) or (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 months or pregnant and breastfeeding women. 
Exceptionally, where nutrient-rich foods are available locally, increasing the 
quantity of food in a general ration to allow more food exchanges may be 
considered,  but  cost-effectiveness  and  impact  on  markets  must  be  taken 
into account. Other options that may also be considered for the prevention of 
micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies include food security measures to promote access 
to nutritious foods (see Food security and nutrition assessment standard 1 on 
page 1(cid:28)(cid:23) and Food security (cid:182) livelihoods standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:182)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16). 
Micronutrient losses, which can occur during transport, storage, processing 
and  cooking,  and  the  bioavailability  of  the  different  chemical  forms  of  the 
vitamins and minerals should be taken into account.

182

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

4.  Monitoring utilisation of food rations: The key indicators address access 
to food but do not quantify food utilisation or nutrient bioavailability. Direct 
measurement  of  nutrient  intake  would  impose  unrealistic  requirements  for 
information collection. However, utilisation may be estimated indirectly using 
information from various sources. These sources might include monitoring 
food availability and use at the household level, assessing food prices and 
food availability in local markets, examining food aid distribution plans and 
records,  assessing  any  contribution  of  wild  foods  and  conducting  food 
security  assessments.  Food  allocation  within  households  may  not  always 
be e(cid:88)uitable and vulnerable people may be particularly affected, but it is not 
usually feasible to measure these aspects. Appropriate distribution mecha-
nisms (cid:15)see Food security (cid:182) food transfers standard (cid:28) on page 19(cid:25)(cid:16), the choice 
of  food  and  discussion  with  the  affected  population  may  help  contribute 
to  improved  food  allocation  within  households  (see  Core  Standard  1  on 
page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16).

5.  Older people can be particularly affected by disasters. Risk factors which 
reduce  access  to  food  and  can  increase  nutrient  requirements  include 
disease  and  disability,  isolation,  psychosocial  stress,  large  family  si(cid:97)e,  cold 
and poverty. Older people should be able to access food sources (including 
food  transfers)  easily.  Foods  should  be  easy  to  prepare  and  consume  and 
should  meet  the  additional  protein  and  micronutrient  requirements  of  older 
people.

6.  People living with HIV may face greater risk of malnutrition as a result of a 
number of factors. These include reduced food intake due to appetite loss or 
dif(cid:196)culties in eating, poor absorption of nutrients due to diarrhoea, parasites 
or damage to intestinal cells, changes in metabolism, and chronic infections 
and illness. The energy re(cid:88)uirements of PLHI(cid:61) increase according to the stage 
of the infection. PLHI(cid:61) need to ensure that they keep as well nourished and 
healthy as possible to delay the onset of (cid:40)I(cid:43)S. Milling and forti(cid:196)cation of food 
or provision of forti(cid:196)ed, blended or specialist food supplements are possible 
strategies  for  improving  access  to  an  adequate  diet.  In  some  situations  it 
may be appropriate to increase the overall size of any food ration. Consider-
ation should be given to the provision of anti-retroviral therapy (ART) and the 
supportive role nutrition may play in tolerance and adherence to this treatment.

7.  Persons with disabilities: Disabled individuals may be at particular risk of 
being separated from immediate family members and usual caregivers in a 
disaster.  They  also  may  face  discrimination  affecting  food  access.  Efforts 
should be made to determine and reduce these risks by ensuring physical 
access to food, developing mechanisms for feeding support (cid:15)e.g. provision 
of spoons and straws, developing systems for home visiting or outreach(cid:16) and 
ensuring access to energy-dense and nutrient-dense foods. Speci(cid:196)c nutri-

183

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

tional risks include dif(cid:196)culties in chewing and swallowing (cid:15)leading to reduced 
food  intake  and  choking(cid:16),  inappropriate  position  or  posture  when  feeding, 
reduced  mobility  affecting  access  to  food  and  sunlight  (cid:15)affecting  (cid:61)itamin 
(cid:43)  status(cid:16),  and  constipation,  which  may  for  example  affect  individuals  with 
cerebral palsy.

8.  Caregivers  and  those  they  are  caring  for  may  face  speci(cid:196)c  nutritional 
barriers,  e.g.  they  may  have  less  time  to  access  food  because  they  are  ill 
or caring for the ill, they may have a greater need to maintain hygienic prac-
tices which may be compromised, they may have fewer assets to exchange 
for food due to the costs of treatment or funerals and they may face social 
stigma and reduced access to community support mechanisms. It is impor-
tant that caregivers be supported and not undermined in the care of vulner-
able individuals; support offered should address feeding, hygiene, health and 
psychosocial support and protection. Existing social networks can be used 
to provide training to selected members of the population to take on respon-
sibilities in these areas (see Protection Principle 4 on page 41).

Food security – food transfers standard 2: Appropriateness 
and acceptability

The food items provided are appropriate and acceptable to recipi-
ents  so  that  they  can  be  used  ef(cid:196)ciently  and  effectively  at  the 
household level.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Consult disaster-affected people during assessment and programme design 
on  the  acceptability,  familiarity  and  appropriateness  of  food  items,  and 
ensure the results inform decisions on food choices (see guidance note 1).

 »

(cid:40)ssess  people(cid:187)s  ability  to  store  food,  their  access  to  water  and  fuel,  and 
cooking times and requirements for soaking when selecting food types (see 
guidance note 2).

 » When unfamiliar food is distributed, provide instructions on appropriate prep-
aration  to  people  who  prepare  food,  preferably  in  the  local  language  (cid:15)see 
guidance note 1).

 »

 »

If wholegrain cereal is distributed, ensure recipients have either the means 
to mill/process it at home or access to adequate milling/processing facilities 
(cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Ensure disaster-affected people have access to culturally important items, 
including condiments (see guidance note 4).

184

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Programme decisions are based on full participation of all targeted people in 
the selection of food items (see guidance notes 1 and 4).

 »

 »

Programme  design  takes  into  account  access  to  water,  cooking  fuel  and 
food processing e(cid:88)uipment (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

There is no general distribution of powdered or liquid milk or milk products as 
single commodities (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Familiarity and acceptability: While nutritional value is the primary consid-
eration when choosing a food basket, the commodities should be familiar to 
the recipients and consistent with religious and cultural traditions, including 
any  food  taboos  for  pregnant  or  breastfeeding  women.  (cid:61)ulnerable  people 
should participate in consultations on food choice. If unfamiliar food is used, 
it  should  have  the  potential  to  be  palatable  locally.  In  assessment  reports 
and re(cid:88)uests to donors, choices of foods (cid:15)inclusion and exclusion(cid:16) should 
be  explained.  When  disasters  prevent  access  to  cooking  facilities,  ready-
to-use  foods  must  be  provided  (see  also  Infant  and  young  child  feeding 
standard (cid:25) on page 1(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:16). Without cooking facilities, there may be no alterna-
tive to providing unfamiliar food and special ‘emergency rations’ may also be 
considered.

2.  Food  storage  and  preparation:  People’s  ability  to  store  food  should 
inform the choice of commodity. For water re(cid:88)uirements, see Water supply 
standard 1 on page 97. A fuel assessment is needed to inform food selec-
tion, ensure bene(cid:196)ciaries can cook food suf(cid:196)ciently to avoid health risks and 
prevent environmental degradation and possibly security risks through exces-
sive  wood-fuel  collection  (cid:15)see  Protection  Principle  1  on  page  (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).  Gener-
ally, food provided should not re(cid:88)uire long cooking time or large (cid:88)uantities 
of water. Milled grain normally reduces cooking time and fuel. For cooking 
e(cid:88)uipment, see Food security (cid:182) food transfers standard (cid:29) on page 197 and 
Non-food items standards (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27) on pages (cid:25)7(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:25)7(cid:27).

3.  Food processing: Wholegrain cereal has the advantage of a longer shelf life 
and may have a higher value to recipients. Where household-level grinding 
is traditional or where there is access to local mills, wholegrain cereal can 
be  distributed.  Facilities  can  be  provided  for  low-extraction  commercial 
milling:  this  removes  germ,  oil  and  en(cid:97)ymes  (cid:15)which  cause  rancidity(cid:16)  and 
greatly increases shelf life, although it also reduces protein content. Milling is 
a particular concern for maize: milled whole maize has a shelf life of only six 
to eight weeks so milling should occur shortly before consumption. National 
laws on import and distribution of wholegrain cereals should be respected. 

185

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Milling costs to recipients may be met by cash or vouchers, the less-preferred 
approach of additional grain, or provision of milling e(cid:88)uipment.

4.  Culturally  important  items:  The  assessment  should  identify  culturally 
important condiments and other food items that are an essential part of daily 
food habits (cid:15)e.g. spices, tea(cid:16) and determine the access people have to these 
items.  The  food  basket  should  be  designed  accordingly,  especially  where 
people will depend on food rations for an extended period.

5.  Milk: There should be no untargeted distribution of free or subsidised infant 
formula, milk powder, li(cid:88)uid milk or milk products as a single commodity (cid:15)this 
includes milk intended for mixing with tea) in a general food distribution or 
a take-home supplementary feeding programme as their indiscriminate use 
may cause serious health hazards. Any interventions involving milk should be 
in accordance with the Operational Guidance on IFE, the International Code 
of Marketing of BMS and subsequent relevant WHA resolutions (see Infant 
and young child feeding standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages 1(cid:28)9(cid:182)1(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:16).

Food security – food transfers standard 3: Food quality and safety

Food distributed is (cid:196)t for human consumption and of appropriate (cid:88)uality.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Select foods that conform to the national standards of the recipient country 
and other internationally accepted standards (see guidance notes 1–2).

 » Distribute food before the expiry date or well within the ‘best before’ date (see 

guidance note 1).

 » Consult recipients about the quality of food distributed and act promptly on 

the issues that arise (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 » Choose appropriate food packaging that is sturdy, convenient for handling, 
storage  and  distribution,  and  is  not  a  ha(cid:97)ard  for  the  environment  (cid:15)see 
guidance note 4).

 »

 »

Label  food  packages  in  an  appropriate  language;  for  packaged  foods, 
indicate the date of production, origin, expiry dates for potentially dangerous 
foods and details of the nutrient content (see guidance note 4).

Transport and store food in appropriate conditions, using best practices in 
storage management, with systematic checks on food (cid:88)uality (cid:15)see guidance 
note (cid:28)(cid:16).

186

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

(cid:40)ll recipients receive food that is (cid:186)(cid:196)t for purpose(cid:187): for safety, food should not 
pose a risk to health; for (cid:88)uality, food should match (cid:88)uality speci(cid:196)cations and 
be nutritious (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:16).

 »

(cid:40)ccountability  monitoring  tracks  all  the  bene(cid:196)ciaries(cid:187)  complaints  received 
and resolved (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Food quality: Foods must conform to the food standards of the recipient 
government and(cid:22)or the Codex (cid:40)limentarius standards with regard to (cid:88)uality, 
packaging, labelling and (cid:186)(cid:196)tness for purpose(cid:187). Food should always be (cid:186)(cid:196)t for 
human consumption(cid:187) but should also be (cid:186)(cid:196)t for purpose(cid:187). When food does 
not have the (cid:88)uality to be used in the intended manner, it is un(cid:196)t for purpose 
even if it is (cid:196)t for human consumption (cid:15)e.g. the (cid:88)uality of (cid:197)our may not enable 
baking at household level even if it is safe to consume(cid:16). For (cid:88)uality testing, 
samples should be drawn according to the sampling plan and systematically 
checked by purchasing agencies to ensure quality is appropriate. Whenever 
re(cid:88)uired, foods either purchased locally or imported should be accompanied 
by phytosanitary certi(cid:196)cates or other inspection certi(cid:196)cates. Random sample 
testing should be carried out on stocks. Fumigation should use appropriate 
products and follow strict procedures. When large quantities are involved or 
there  are  doubts  or  disputes  about  (cid:88)uality,  independent  (cid:88)uality  surveyors 
should  inspect  the  consignment.  Information  on  age  and  quality  of  food 
consignments  may  be  obtained  from  supplier  certi(cid:196)cates,  (cid:88)uality  control 
inspection  reports,  package  labels  and  warehouse  reports.  Food  un(cid:196)t  for 
purpose should be carefully disposed of (see Food security – food transfers 
standard (cid:27), guidance note 1(cid:23) on page 19(cid:23)(cid:16).

2.  Genetically  modiﬁed  foods:  National  regulations  concerning  the  receipt 
and use of genetically modi(cid:196)ed foods must be understood and respected. 
Such regulations should be taken into account when planning food transfers 
that are expected to use imports.

3.  Complaints  and  response  mechanism:  Agencies  should  ensure  adequate 
complaints and response mechanisms are in place on food quality and safety for 
accountability to recipients (cid:15)see Core Standard 1, guidance note (cid:25) on page (cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:16).

4.  Packaging:  If  possible,  packaging  should  allow  direct  distribution  without 
re-measuring  (e.g.  scooping)  or  repacking:  appropriate  package  sizes  can 
help ensure ration standards are met. Food packaging should not carry any 
messages that are politically or religiously motivated or divisive in nature. Envi-
ronmental risks can be minimised by the choice of packaging and manage-

187

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

ment of empty packages (such as sacks and tins). Ready-to-use foods pack-
aging (cid:15)such as foil wrappers(cid:16) may re(cid:88)uire speci(cid:196)c controls for safe disposal.

5.  Storage  areas  should  be  dry  and  hygienic,  ade(cid:88)uately  protected  from 
weather  conditions  and  uncontaminated  by  chemical  or  other  residues. 
They should also be secured against pests such as insects and rodents (see 
also Food security – food transfers standard 4 on page 188 and Solid waste 
management standard 1 on page 117).

Food security – food transfers standard 4: Supply  
chain management (SCM)

Commodities and associated costs are well managed using impar-
tial, transparent and responsive systems.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Establish  a  coordinated,  ef(cid:196)cient  SCM  system  using  local  capacity  where 
feasible (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

 »

 »

 »

Ensure a transparent, fair and open procedure for awarding contracts (cid:15)see 
guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:16).

Build sound relationships with suppliers and service providers and enforce 
ethical practices (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

Train  and  supervise  staff  at  all  levels  of  the  SCM  system  to  observe  food 
(cid:88)uality and safety procedures (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Establish appropriate accountability procedures including inventory, reporting 
and (cid:196)nancial systems (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:31)(cid:16).

 » Minimise  losses,  including  theft,  and  account  for  all  losses  (cid:15)see  guidance 

notes 9–11).

 » Monitor and manage the food pipeline so that all possible actions are taken 
to avoid illegal diversions and interruption to distributions and all stakeholders 
are regularly informed on the performance of the supply chain (see guidance 
notes 1(cid:25)(cid:182)1(cid:26)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Food reaches intended distribution points (see guidance notes 1 and 7).

 » Commodity tracking systems, inventory accounting and reporting systems are 
in place from the beginning of the intervention (cid:15)see guidance notes 7(cid:182)(cid:31), 11(cid:182)1(cid:26)(cid:16).

188

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

 »

SCM  assessment  reports  show  evidence  of  assessment  and  inventory  of 
local SCM capacities, local food availability and local logistics infrastructure 
(cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

SCM reporting shows:

 - evidence of transparent, fair and open systems for awarding contracts
 - evidence  of  supplier/service  provider  performance  management  and 

reporting

 - number and proportion of SCM staff trained
 - completeness and accuracy of documentation
 - losses are minimised and maintained at less than 2 per cent and all food 

is accounted for

 - regular  pipeline  analysis  and  relevant  stakeholders  informed  of  food 

pipeline and supply chain.

Guidance notes
1.  Supply chain management is an integrated approach to logistics. Starting 
with  the  choice  of  commodity,  it  includes  sourcing,  procurement,  (cid:88)uality 
assurance,  packaging,  shipping,  transportation,  warehousing,  inventory 
management and insurance. SCM involves many different partners, and it is 
important that activities are coordinated (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:25) on page (cid:28)(cid:31)(cid:16). 
Management  and  monitoring  practices  should  ensure  commodities  are 
safeguarded  to  distribution  points.  However,  humanitarian  agencies  are 
also responsible for the food reaching the targeted bene(cid:196)ciaries (cid:15)see Food 
security (cid:182) food transfers standards (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29) on pages 19(cid:25)(cid:182)197(cid:16).

2.  Using  local  services:  An  assessment  should  be  made  of  the  availability 
and reliability of local capability before sourcing from outside the area. Care 
must be taken to ensure that sourcing locally does not cause or exacerbate 
hostilities and do more harm in the community. Reputable local or regional 
transporters and freight forwarders have valuable knowledge of local regula-
tions, procedures and facilities, and can help to ensure compliance with the 
laws of the host country and to expedite deliveries. In a con(cid:197)ict environment, 
the vetting of service providers should be especially rigorous.

3.  Local  sourcing  versus  importation:  The  local  availability  of  goods,  and 
the  implications  for  local  production  and  market  systems  of  food  either 
being  sourced  locally  or  imported,  should  be  assessed,  including  envi-
ronmental  sustainability  (see  Food  security  and  nutrition  assessment 
standard 1 on page 1(cid:28)(cid:23) and Food security (cid:182) livelihoods standards 1 and (cid:26) 
on pages 204–211). Markets are stimulated and supported through buying 
food locally or regionally; this may give farmers an incentive to produce more 
and help boost the local economy. Where several organisations are involved, 

189

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

local  sourcing  should  be  coordinated  as  far  as  possible.  Other  in-country 
sources  of  commodities  may  include  loans  or  reallocations  from  existing 
food  programmes  (donor  agreement  may  be  necessary)  or  national  grain 
reserves, or loans from, or swaps with, commercial suppliers.

4. 

Impartiality:  Fair  and  transparent  contracting  procedures  are  essential  to 
avoid suspicion of favouritism or corruption. Service provider performance 
should be evaluated and shortlists updated.

5.  Skills  and  training:  Experienced  SCM  practitioners  and  programme 
managers  should  be  mobilised  to  set  up  the  SCM  system  and  train  staff. 
Particular types of relevant expertise include contracts management, trans-
portation  and  warehouse  management,  inventory  management,  pipeline 
analysis  and  information  management,  shipment  tracking  and  import 
management. When training is carried out, it should include staff of partner 
organisations and service providers and be in the local language.

6.  Food is not used for payment: The use of food to pay for logistics opera-
tions, such as unloading at warehouses and distribution points, should be 
avoided. If cash payments are not possible and food is used, adjustments 
should be made on the food amounts sent to distribution points so that origi-
nally planned amounts still reach targeted recipients.

7.  Reporting  (including  logistics  cluster  and  inter-agency):  Most  food 
donors  have  speci(cid:196)c  reporting  re(cid:88)uirements  and  supply  chain  managers 
should  be  aware  of  these  requirements  and  establish  systems  that  meet 
them. Day-to-day management needs include reporting promptly any delays 
or deviations in the supply chain. Pipeline information and other SCM reports 
should be shared in a transparent manner.

8.  Documentation:  Suf(cid:196)cient  documentation  and  forms  (cid:15)waybills,  stock 
ledgers, reporting forms, etc.(cid:16) should be available in the local language at all 
locations where goods are received, stored and(cid:22)or dispatched, in order to 
maintain a documented audit trail of transactions.

9.  Warehousing: Dedicated warehouses for food are preferable to shared facil-
ities but good management can minimise risks in the latter. When selecting 
a warehouse, it should be established that no ha(cid:97)ardous goods have previ-
ously been stored there and there is no danger of contamination. Factors to 
consider include security, capacity, ease of access, structural solidity (cid:15)of roof, 
walls, doors and (cid:197)oor(cid:16) and absence of any threat of (cid:197)ooding.

10.  Disposal  of  commodities  unﬁt  for  human  consumption:  Damaged 
commodities should be inspected by (cid:88)uali(cid:196)ed inspectors (cid:15)such as food safety 
experts and public health laboratories(cid:16) to certify them as (cid:196)t or un(cid:196)t for human 
consumption.  Disposal  should  be  executed  quickly  before  food  becomes 

190

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

a health ha(cid:97)ard. Methods of disposal of un(cid:196)t commodities include sale for 
animal  feed  and  burial/incineration  authorised  and  witnessed  by  relevant 
authorities. For disposal as animal feed, certi(cid:196)cation must be obtained for 
(cid:196)tness for this purpose. In all cases, un(cid:196)t commodities must not re-enter the 
human or animal food supply chain and disposal must not harm the environ-
ment or contaminate water sources.

11.  Threats to the supply chain: In situations of armed con(cid:197)ict or general inse-
curity,  there  is  a  danger  of  food  being  looted  or  re(cid:88)uisitioned  by  warring 
parties, and the risks to security of transport routes and warehouses must be 
managed. There is potential for theft at all stages of the supply chain: control 
systems must be established and supervised at all storage, hand-over and 
distribution  points  to  minimise  this  risk.  Internal  control  systems  should 
ensure  division  of  responsibilities  to  reduce  the  risk  of  collusion.  Stocks 
should  be  regularly  checked  to  detect  illegal  diversion  of  food.  Measures 
should be taken not only to ensure the integrity of the supply chain but also 
to analyse and address broader political and security implications, such as 
the possibility of diverted stocks fuelling an armed con(cid:197)ict (cid:15)see Protection 
Principle 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).

12.  Pipeline analysis should be regularly performed and relevant information on 
stock levels, expected arrivals and distributions shared among stakeholders 
involved in the supply chain. Tracking and forecasting of stock levels should 
highlight anticipated shortfalls and problems in time for solutions to be found. 
Information-sharing among partners may facilitate loans to prevent pipeline 
breaks. Pipeline breaks may be unavoidable if resources are inadequate. In 
such cases, prioritisation of items in the food basket may be necessary when 
programming  resources  (i.e.  choosing  what  to  buy)  with  available  funds. 
Stakeholders must be consulted and solutions may include reducing overall 
ration si(cid:97)e or reducing or excluding the food types which bene(cid:196)ciaries have 
more access to (physically and economically).

13.  Providing information: Relevant information should be provided to appro-
priate stakeholders rather than to all stakeholders to avoid misunderstand-
ings. The use of local media, traditional methods of news dissemination and 
current technologies (cid:15)mobile phone text messages, email(cid:16) should be consid-
ered as a way of keeping local of(cid:196)cials and recipients informed about deliv-
eries and reinforcing transparency.

191

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Food security – food transfers standard 5: Targeting and 
distribution

The  method  of  targeted  food  distribution  is  responsive,  timely, 
transparent  and  safe,  supports  dignity  and  is  appropriate  to  local 
conditions.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Identify and target recipients of food on the basis of need, consulting appro-
priate stakeholders (see guidance notes 1–2).

 » (cid:43)esign ef(cid:196)cient and e(cid:88)uitable food distribution methods that support dignity 
in consultation with partner organisations, local groups and recipients. The 
design process should have the active participation of women and represen-
tatives of persons with disabilities, older people and individuals with reduced 
mobility (see guidance notes 1-4).

 » Consult  local  stakeholders  on  appropriate  points  for  distribution  that  will 

ensure easy access and safety for recipients (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

 »

Inform recipients in advance on the distribution plan and quality and quantity 
of the food ration (see guidance notes 7–8).

 » Monitor  and  evaluate  the  performance  of  targeted  food  distribution  (see 

guidance note 9).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Targeting criteria must be based on thorough analysis of vulnerability (see 
guidance note 1).

 »

 »

 »

 »

Targeting mechanisms are agreed among the disaster-affected population 
(see guidance notes 1–2).

Existence of relevant alternative distribution models for people with reduced 
mobility (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27)(cid:16).

Recipients should not have to walk more than 10 kilometres to the distribu-
tion site, i.e. no more than a four-hour walk (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Presence  of  ration  cards,  banners  and(cid:22)or  signposts  specifying  the  food 
rations during distributions (see guidance notes 7–8).

 » Monitoring  and(cid:22)or  bene(cid:196)ciary  accountability  mechanisms  (cid:15)see  guidance 

note 9) track:

192

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

 - stakeholders’ preferences on distribution methods
 - information provided to bene(cid:196)ciaries on distribution
 - bene(cid:196)ciaries(cid:22)food  receipt:  actual  versus  planned  (cid:15)timeliness,  (cid:88)uantity, 

quality).

Guidance notes
1.  Targeting: Food should be targeted to the people assessed to be most in 
need:  the  most  acutely  food  insecure  households  and  malnourished  indi-
viduals  (cid:15)see  (cid:61)ulnerabilities  and  capacities  of  disaster-affected  populations 
on page 148 and Food security and nutrition assessment standards 1–2 on 
pages  1(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:182)1(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:16).  Targeting  spans  throughout  the  intervention,  not  just  the 
initial phase. Finding the right balance between exclusion errors (which can 
be  life-threatening)  and  inclusion  errors  (which  are  potentially  disruptive  or 
wasteful(cid:16)  is  complex;  moreover,  reducing  errors  normally  increases  costs. 
In acute emergencies, inclusion errors may be more acceptable than exclu-
sion errors: blanket distributions may be appropriate in sudden-onset disas-
ters where all households have suffered similar losses, or where a detailed 
targeting assessment is not possible due to lack of access. The selection of 
agents involved in targeting should be based on their impartiality, capacity 
and accountability. Targeting agents may include local elders, locally elected 
relief  committees,  civil  society  organisations,  local  NGOs,  local  govern-
mental institutions, or international NGOs. The selection of women targeting 
agents is strongly encouraged. Targeting approaches need to be clear and 
accepted by both recipient and non-recipient populations to avoid creating 
tensions and doing harm (cid:15)see Core Standard 1, guidance note (cid:26) on page (cid:28)7 
and Protection Principle (cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16).

2.  Registration: Formal registration of households to receive food should be 
carried out as soon as is feasible, and updated as necessary. Information 
on  bene(cid:196)ciaries  is  essential  to  design  an  effective  distribution  system  (cid:15)the 
si(cid:97)e and demographic pro(cid:196)le of a population in(cid:197)uences the organisation of 
distribution(cid:16),  to  draw  up  bene(cid:196)ciary  lists,  tally  sheets  and  rations  cards  (cid:15)if 
issued(cid:16) and to identify people with speci(cid:196)c needs. In camps, registration is 
often challenging, especially where displaced people do not have identi(cid:196)ca-
tion documents (cid:15)see Protection Principle (cid:27), guidance notes (cid:27)(cid:182)(cid:28) on page (cid:27)(cid:25)(cid:16). 
Lists from local authorities and community-generated household lists may 
be useful, provided an independent assessment proves them accurate and 
impartial. Women from the disaster-affected population should be encour-
aged to help in the registration process. Agencies should ensure that vulner-
able individuals are not omitted from distribution lists, especially housebound 
people. While heads of household are normally registered, women should 
have the right to be registered in their own names: women may utilise trans-

193

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

fers more appropriately at household level. If registration is not possible in 
the initial stages of a disaster, it should be completed as soon as the situ-
ation  has  stabilised;  this  is  especially  important  when  food  transfers  are 
required for lengthy periods. A complaints and response mechanism should 
be established for the registration process (cid:15)see Core Standard 1, guidance 
notes (cid:25) and (cid:29) on pages (cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)7(cid:16).

3.  Distribution methods for ‘dry’ rations: Most distribution methods evolve 
over time. A general food distribution is normally in the form of dry rations 
to be cooked by bene(cid:196)ciaries in their homes. Recipients could be an indi-
vidual or household ration-card holder, a representative of a group of house-
holds, traditional leaders or leaders of a community-based targeted distribu-
tion. Conditions on the ground determine the best recipient to select, and 
changing conditions may change the recipient. The risks inherent in distribu-
tions via representatives or leaders should be carefully assessed. The selec-
tion of the recipients should consider the impact on workloads and possible 
risks of violence, including domestic abuse (cid:15)see Protection Principles 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on 
pages (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16). The fre(cid:88)uency of distributions should consider the weight of 
the food ration and the bene(cid:196)ciaries(cid:187) means to carry it home. Speci(cid:196)c action 
may  be  necessary  to  ensure  that  older  people  and  persons  with  disabili-
ties can collect their entitlements: other community members may assist but 
providing weekly or two-week rations may be easier to collect than monthly 
rations. Attempts to target vulnerable people should not add to any stigma 
that they already experience: this may be a particular issue in populations 
with a large number of people living with HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S (cid:15)see Protection Prin-
ciple (cid:27), guidance notes 1, 9(cid:182)11 on pages (cid:27)1(cid:182)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:16).

4.  Distribution methods for ‘wet’ rations: Exceptionally, a general food distri-
bution can be a cooked meal or ready-to-eat food for an initial period during 
an acute emergency. These rations may be appropriate when, for example, 
people are on the move, extreme insecurity and carrying food home would 
put bene(cid:196)ciaries at risk of theft or violence, high levels of abuse or taxation 
excludes  vulnerable  people,  major  displacement  results  in  people  losing 
their  assets  (cooking  equipment  and/or  fuel)  or  leaves  them  too  weak  to 
cook  for  themselves,  local  leaders  are  diverting  rations  or  there  are  envi-
ronmental considerations (e.g. to protect a fragile ecological environment by 
avoiding (cid:196)rewood collection(cid:16). School meals and food incentives for education 
personnel may be used as a distribution mechanism in an emergency (see 
INEE Minimum Standards for Education).

5.  Distribution  points  and  travel:  Distribution  points  should  be  established 
where they are safe and most convenient for the recipients, not based on 
logistic  convenience  for  the  agency  (cid:15)see  Protection  Principle  (cid:26),  guidance 
notes  (cid:29)(cid:182)9  on  page  (cid:26)9(cid:16).  These  should  take  into  consideration  terrain  and 

194

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

proximity to other sources of support (cid:15)potable water, toilets, medical services, 
shade, shelter, safe spaces for women(cid:16). (cid:43)istribution points should avoid areas 
where people would have to cross military or armed checkpoints or negotiate 
safe passage. The frequency of distributions and the number of distribution 
points should take into account the time it takes recipients to travel to distri-
bution points and the practicalities and costs of transporting commodities. 
Recipients should be able to travel to and from a distribution point within one 
day; alternative means of distribution should be developed to reach those 
who cannot and may be isolated (cid:15)e.g. individuals with mobility dif(cid:196)culties(cid:16). 
Walking speeds average (cid:28) km(cid:22)hour but are slower on poor terrain and on 
slopes; times vary with age and level of mobility. (cid:40)ccess to distribution is a 
common source of anxiety for marginalised and excluded populations in a 
disaster situation. Distributions should be scheduled to minimise disruption 
to everyday activities, at times that allow travel to distribution points during 
daylight  hours  for  the  protection  of  recipients  and  to  avoid  bene(cid:196)ciaries 
staying overnight, as this carries additional risks (cid:15)see Protection Principle 1 
on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).

6.  Minimising  security  risks:  Food  distributions  can  create  security  risks, 
including diversion and violence. Tensions can run high during distributions. 
Women, children, older people and persons with disabilities are at particular 
risk of losing their entitlements. The risks must be assessed in advance and 
steps taken to minimise them. These include supervision of the distributions 
by trained staff and guarding of distribution points by the affected popula-
tions  themselves.  If  necessary,  the  local  police  may  be  involved,  but  they 
should be sensitised to the objectives of the food transfers. Careful planning 
of the site layout at distribution points can facilitate crowd control and lower 
security risks. Speci(cid:196)c measures to prevent, monitor and respond to gender-
based violence, including sexual exploitation associated with food distribu-
tion, should be enforced. These include segregating men and women, for 
example through a physical barrier or by offering separate distribution times, 
informing all food distribution teams about appropriate conduct and penal-
ties for sexual abuse, and including female (cid:186)guardians(cid:187) to oversee off-loading, 
registration,  distribution  and  post-distribution  of  food  (cid:15)see  also  guidance 
note (cid:28) and Protection Principle (cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16).

7.  Dissemination of information: Recipients should be informed about:

 - the quantity and type of ration to be distributed and the reasons for any 
differences from the plan; ration information should be displayed promi-
nently at distribution sites in formats accessible to people who cannot read 
or who have communication dif(cid:196)culties (cid:15)e.g. written in the local language 
and/or  drawn  pictorially  and/or  as  oral  information)  so  that  people  are 
aware of their entitlements

195

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 - the distribution plan (cid:15)day, time, location, fre(cid:88)uency(cid:16) and any changes
 - the nutritional (cid:88)uality of the food and, if needed, special attention re(cid:88)uired 

by recipients to protect its nutritional value

 - the requirements for the safe handling and use of the foods
 - speci(cid:196)c information for optimum use of food for children (cid:15)see Infant and 

young child feeding standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages 1(cid:28)9(cid:182)1(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:16)

 - the  appropriate  ways  for  recipients  to  obtain  more  information  on  the 

programme and the process for complaints.

(cid:15)See Core Standard 1, guidance notes (cid:27)(cid:182)(cid:29) on page (cid:28)7.(cid:16)

8.  Changes to the programme: Changes in the food basket or ration levels 
caused by insuf(cid:196)cient availability of food must be discussed with the recipi-
ents,  through  distribution  committees,  community  leaders  and  represen-
tative organisations. A course of action should be jointly developed before 
distributions are made. The distribution committee should inform people of 
changes, the reasons behind them and when normal rations will be resumed. 
The following options may be considered:

 - reduce the rations to all recipients (an equal share of available commodities 

or a reduced food basket)

 - give  a  ‘full’  ration  to  vulnerable  individuals  and  a  ‘reduced’  ration  to  the 

general population

 - as a last resort, postpone the distribution.
If distribution of the planned ration is not possible, the shortfall is not neces-
sarily corrected in the following distribution (i.e. retroactive provision may not 
be appropriate).

9.  Monitoring and evaluation should be carried out at all levels of the supply 
chain and to the point of consumption (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:28) on page (cid:29)(cid:31)(cid:16). 
(cid:40)t distribution points, check that arrangements for distributions are in place 
before they take place (cid:15)e.g. for registration, security, dissemination of informa-
tion). Random weighing should be carried out on rations collected by house-
holds to measure the accuracy and e(cid:88)uity of distribution management, with 
recipients interviewed. Random visits to households can help ascertain the 
acceptability and usefulness of the ration, and also identify people who meet 
the selection criteria but are not receiving food. Such visits can also discover 
if extra food is being received, where it is coming from, what it is being used 
for and by whom (cid:15)e.g. as a result of commandeering, recruitment or exploi-
tation,  sexual  or  otherwise(cid:16).  Monitoring  should  analyse  the  impact  of  food 
transfers on the safety of the bene(cid:196)ciaries. The wider effects of food distribu-
tions should also be evaluated, such as implications of the agricultural cycle, 
agricultural activities, market conditions and availability of agricultural inputs.

196

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Food security – food transfers standard 6: Food use

Food is stored, prepared and consumed in a safe and appropriate 
manner at both household and community levels.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Protect  bene(cid:196)ciaries  from  inappropriate  food  handling  or  preparation  (cid:15)see 
guidance note 1).

 » Disseminate relevant information on the importance of food hygiene to food 
recipients and promote a good understanding of hygienic practices in food 
handling (see guidance notes 1–2).

 » Where  cooked  food  is  distributed,  train  staff  in  safe  storage  and  handling 
of  food,  preparation  of  food  and  the  potential  health  ha(cid:97)ards  caused  by 
improper practices (see guidance note 1).

 » Consult  (cid:15)and  advise  where  necessary(cid:16)  bene(cid:196)ciaries  on  storage,  prepara-
tion,  cooking  and  consumption  of  food  distributed  and  the  implications  of 
targeted provision for vulnerable people and respond to issues that arise (see 
guidance notes 1–2).

 »

 »

Ensure households have access to appropriate cooking utensils, fuel, potable 
water and hygiene materials (see guidance notes 1–4).

For individuals who cannot prepare food or cannot feed themselves, ensure 
access to carers to prepare appropriate food and administer feeding where 
necessary (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » No cases of health hazards from food distributed.

 »

 »

 »

 »

Raise  bene(cid:196)ciaries(cid:187)  awareness  of  good  food  hygiene  (cid:15)see  guidance 
notes 1–2).

All relevant staff must be trained on food handling and hazards from improper 
practices (see guidance note 1).

Full household access to adequate and safe food preparation materials and 
e(cid:88)uipment (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27)(cid:16).

Full presence of carers for all individuals with special assistance needs (see 
guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

197

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Guidance notes
1.  Food hygiene: Disasters may disrupt people’s normal hygiene practices. It 
may be necessary to promote food hygiene and actively support measures 
compatible  with  local  conditions  and  disease  patterns,  e.g.  stressing  the 
importance of washing hands before handling food, avoiding contamination of 
water and taking pest-control measures. Food recipients should be informed 
about  how  to  store  food  safely  at  the  household  level.  Caregivers  should 
be provided with information on the optimal use of household resources for 
feeding children and safe methods for food preparation (see Hygiene promo-
tion standards 1–2 on pages 91–94). Where community kitchens have been 
set up to provide hot meals to a disaster-affected population, special atten-
tion is needed in selecting the kitchen site, taking into account accessibility, 
safety and hygiene conditions of the site, cooking and drinking water avail-
ability, and eating space.

2.  Sources of information: Mechanisms are needed for sharing information 
and  collecting  feedback  from  bene(cid:196)ciaries,  particularly  women  (cid:15)see  Core 
Standard 1, guidance notes (cid:25) and (cid:29) on pages (cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)7(cid:16). For dissemination of 
instructions about food, schools and safe learning spaces should be consid-
ered as suitable locations. Accessible formats or diagrams may be needed 
for people with different communication re(cid:88)uirements (cid:15)see Core Standard 1, 
guidance note (cid:27) on page (cid:28)7(cid:16).

3.  Fuel, potable water and household items: When necessary, appropriate 
fuel should be provided or a wood planting or harvesting programme estab-
lished, with supervision for the safety of women and children, the main gath-
erers  of  (cid:196)rewood  (cid:15)for  stoves  and  fuel,  see  Non-food  items  standard  (cid:27)  on 
page (cid:25)7(cid:27)(cid:16). For water access, (cid:88)uantity, (cid:88)uality and facilities, see Water supply 
standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages 97(cid:182)1(cid:23)(cid:26). For cooking and eating utensils and water 
containers, see Non-food items standard (cid:26) on page (cid:25)7(cid:26).

4.  Access to food processing facilities such as cereal grinding mills enable 
people to prepare food in the form of their choice and also save time for other 
productive  activities.  Household-level  food  processing  such  as  milling  can 
reduce the time and the quantities of water and fuel required for cooking (see 
Food security (cid:182) food transfers standard (cid:25), guidance note (cid:25) on page 1(cid:31)(cid:28)(cid:16).

5.  Speciﬁc  needs:  Individuals  who  require  assistance  with  feeding  may 
include  young  children,  older  people,  persons  with  disabilities  and  people 
living with HI(cid:61) (cid:15)see Infant and young child feeding standard (cid:25) on page 1(cid:29)(cid:23) 
and Food security (cid:182) food transfers standard 1, guidance notes (cid:28)(cid:182)7 on page 
1(cid:31)(cid:26)(cid:16).  Outreach  programmes  or  additional  support  and  follow-up  may  be 
necessary to support some people with reduced capacity to provide food to 
dependents (e.g. parents with mental illness).

198

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

4.2.  Food security – cash and voucher transfers

Cash and voucher transfers represent two forms of assistance: cash transfers 
provide people with money, while voucher transfers provide people with coupons 
to purchase a (cid:196)xed (cid:88)uantity of a speci(cid:196)ed product such as food (cid:15)commodity-
based vouchers(cid:16) or a (cid:196)xed monetary value (cid:15)value-based vouchers(cid:16). While their 
objectives  and  design  may  differ,  cash  and  voucher  transfers  share  a  market-
based approach where bene(cid:196)ciaries are provided with purchasing power.

Cash and voucher transfers are used to meet basic food and non-food needs or 
to purchase assets enabling people to resume economic activity. Unconditional 
(or non-targeted or ‘universal’) cash grants have no conditions on how the money 
should  be  used,  but  if  basic  needs  have  been  identi(cid:196)ed  in  the  assessment,  it 
is  expected  that  the  money  will  be  used  to  cover  these  needs.  If  support  to 
livelihoods or productive activities has been identi(cid:196)ed as a need, then the cash 
distributed would be expected to be used for this. Unconditional cash grants may 
be appropriate at the start of an emergency. Conditional cash grants have the 
condition that the recipient uses the cash for speci(cid:196)c purposes (cid:15)e.g. to rebuild 
houses, provide labour, establish or re-establish a livelihood and(cid:22)or attend health 
services(cid:16). (cid:61)ouchers give access to a range of predetermined commodities (cid:15)e.g. 
food,  livestock,  seeds,  tools(cid:16)  or  services  (cid:15)e.g.  grinding  mills,  transport,  market 
or  stand  access,  bank  loans(cid:16).  (cid:61)ouchers  may  have  either  a  cash  value  or  a 
commodity  value,  to  be  used  in  pre-selected  shops,  with  speci(cid:196)ed  traders  or 
service providers or at fairs. (cid:61)oucher programmes should refer to the standards 
for the sector concerned; for example, food voucher programmes should refer to 
Food security (cid:182) food transfers standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) and (cid:29) on pages 1(cid:31)(cid:23)(cid:182)197.

The choice of appropriate transfers (cid:15)food, cash or vouchers(cid:16) re(cid:88)uires a context-
speci(cid:196)c analysis including cost ef(cid:196)ciency, secondary market impacts, the (cid:197)exibility 
of the transfer, targeting and risks of insecurity and corruption.

199

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Food security – cash and voucher transfers  
standard 1: Access to available goods and services

Cash and vouchers are considered as ways to address basic needs 
and to protect and re-establish livelihoods.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Consult and involve bene(cid:196)ciaries, community representatives and other key 
stakeholders in assessment, design, implementation, monitoring and evalua-
tion (cid:15)see guidance notes 1, (cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:182)7 and Core Standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)1(cid:16).

 »

Assess and analyse if people could buy what they need in local markets at 
prices that are cost-ef(cid:196)cient compared with alternative transfers, and analyse 
the market chain (see guidance note 2).

 » Choose  cash  or  vouchers  or  a  combination  of  these  based  on  the  most 
appropriate  delivery  mechanism  and  the  likely  bene(cid:196)ts  to  the  disaster-
affected population and the local economy (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

 »

Implement measures to reduce risks of illegal diversion, insecurity, in(cid:197)ation, 
harmful use and negative impacts on disadvantaged groups. Particular care 
is needed for targeting systems (see guidance notes 4 and 7).

 » Monitor  to  assess  if  cash  and/or  vouchers  remain  the  most  appropriate 

transfer and if adjustments are needed (see guidance note 8).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with guidance notes)
 »

All targeted populations meet some or all their basic food needs and other 
livelihood  needs  (cid:15)e.g.  productive  assets,  health,  education,  transportation, 
shelter,  transport(cid:16)  through  purchase  from  the  local  markets  (cid:15)see  guidance 
notes 1(cid:182)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:16).

 » Cash and/or vouchers are the preferred form of transfer for all targeted popu-
lations,  particularly  for  women  and  other  vulnerable  people  (cid:15)see  guidance 
notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:31)(cid:16).

 »

 »

 »

The transfer does not result in anti-social expenditures (see guidance notes 4 
and 8).

The transfer does not generate insecurity (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:16).

The local economy is supported to recover from the disaster (see guidance 
notes 1(cid:182)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:16).

200

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Guidance notes
1.  Cash and voucher transfers are a tool: Cash and vouchers are mecha-
nisms  to  achieve  desired  goals,  not  interventions  in  themselves.  (cid:40)  careful 
comparative  assessment  should  indicate  whether  cash  and/or  vouchers 
are  appropriate  or  not,  and  whether  they  should  be  used  on  their  own  or 
combined with other responses, such as in-kind support. Cash and voucher 
transfers can be used at different stages of a disaster. The response should 
be  determined  not  only  by  the  expected  ef(cid:196)ciency  and  effectiveness  in 
meeting  bene(cid:196)ciaries(cid:187)  basic  needs  or  re-establishing  livelihoods,  but  also 
by an expected lower level of associated risks. Cash and vouchers can offer 
greater choice and (cid:197)exibility than in-kind responses and this may give recipi-
ents a sense of greater dignity. Cash and vouchers may also create positive 
multiplier  effects  in  local  economies,  which  should  be  considered  during 
assessments. Cash and vouchers can be used as follows:

2. 

 - cash grants – conditional or unconditional transfer of cash in either one or 

several instalments to meet a range of needs

 - commodity  or  value-based  voucher  –  transfer  of  paper  or  electronic 
vouchers to be exchanged for speci(cid:196)c goods or a range of goods according 
to the value of the voucher

 - cash for work – transfer of cash as income earned by participating in speci-

(cid:196)ed activities (cid:15)usually activities re(cid:88)uiring physical labour(cid:16).

Planning, implementation and monitoring should involve local stakeholders 
such as governments, local authorities, community structures and represen-
tatives, cooperatives, associations, local groups and bene(cid:196)ciaries. This will 
help ensure relevance and sustainability. An exit strategy should be planned 
with key stakeholders from design onwards.

Impact  on  local  economies  and  market  systems:  Market  assessment 
should analyse the situation before and after the disaster, and the competi-
tiveness and integration of the market to respond to current needs. Analysis 
should also show the roles of different market actors, availability and price 
of  commodities  (cid:15)livelihoods  assets,  shelter  materials,  food  and  others 
depending  on  objectives(cid:16),  seasonality  and  physical,  social  and  economic 
access by different groups of vulnerable people. Cash and vouchers can be 
appropriate when markets are functioning and accessible, and when food 
and other basic items are available in the required amounts and at reason-
able prices. Such transfers may stimulate the local economy to a quicker and 
more  sustainable  recovery.  Market  responses  can  promote  local  procure-
ment and better use of the capabilities of existing market actors. Cash and 
vouchers  used  when  the  context  is  inappropriate  can  distort  markets  and 
may have negative effects such as in(cid:197)ation. Market monitoring is essential 

201

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

to  understand  the  impact  of  cash  and  vouchers  on  local  economies  and 
people.

3.  Cash and voucher delivery mechanisms: Cash and vouchers can be deliv-
ered through local banks, shops, traders, local money transfer companies, 
remittance companies and post of(cid:196)ces. They can be delivered physically or 
through technologies such as mobile banking and mobile phone networks. 
(cid:41)anks are usually ef(cid:196)cient and effective but may be less accessible to vulner-
able people; if banks are accessible, perhaps through mobile banking, they 
can be a more secure option. The choice of delivery mechanism requires an 
assessment of options and consultation with recipients. Issues to consider 
are costs for recipients (cid:15)bank charges, travel time and costs, time at collec-
tion points(cid:16), costs for the organisation (cid:15)charges and set-up costs of provider, 
staff time to set up and administer, and transport, security, education and 
training  of  recipients(cid:16),  ef(cid:196)ciency  and  effectiveness  (cid:15)reliability,  resilience, 
accountability, transparency, monitoring, (cid:197)exibility, (cid:196)nancial control, (cid:196)nancial 
security  and  access  by  vulnerable  people).  An  approach  that  may  appear 
costly may still be the most appropriate transfer mechanism.

4.  Considering  risks:  Common  concerns  on  the  risks  of  cash  and  voucher 
transfers  include  fears  that  cash  and  vouchers  could  contribute  to  price 
in(cid:197)ation (cid:15)leaving disaster-affected people, and others, with less purchasing 
power(cid:16), the use of cash and vouchers for anti-social purposes (cid:15)e.g. alcohol 
and/or tobacco abuse) and differential access of women and men to cash 
compared with in-kind resources. Other concerns are that transporting cash 
may create security risks for implementing staff and for the affected popula-
tion (cid:15)see Protection Principle 1 on page  (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16) and that the attractiveness of 
cash  may  make  it  more  dif(cid:196)cult  to  target  recipients  and  may  increase  the 
risks of corrupt diversion or sei(cid:97)ure by armed groups. However, in-kind distri-
butions also have risks (cid:15)see Food security (cid:182) food transfers standards (cid:27)(cid:182)(cid:28) on 
pages 188–192). The risks for cash and vouchers can be minimised through 
good  design,  thorough  risk  analysis  and  good  management.  (cid:43)ecision-
making  should  be  through  evidence-based  consultation:  unfounded  fears 
should not in(cid:197)uence programme planning.

5.  Setting the value of the cash or voucher transfer: The value set for trans-
fers  is  context-speci(cid:196)c.  Calculations  should  be  in  coordination  with  other 
agencies  and  based  on  the  disaster-affected  population’s  priorities  and 
needs,  prices  for  key  goods  expected  to  be  purchased  in  local  markets, 
other assistance that has been and(cid:22)or will be given, additional related costs 
(cid:15)e.g. travel assistance for people with restricted mobility(cid:16), method, si(cid:97)e and 
fre(cid:88)uency of payments and timing of payment in relation to seasonality, and 
objectives of the programme and transfer (e.g. covering food needs based 
on the food basket or providing employment based on the daily labour rate). 

202

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Price  (cid:197)uctuations  can  reduce  the  success  of  cash  and  voucher  transfers. 
(cid:41)udget  (cid:197)exibility  is  essential  to  adjust  the  value  of  the  transfer  or  add  a 
commodity component, based on market monitoring.

6.  Choosing which type of cash or voucher transfer: The appropriate type 
of  transfer  depends  upon  the  programme  objectives  and  local  context.  A 
combination  of  approaches  may  be  appropriate,  including  with  in-kind 
assistance and seasonal variations. (cid:40)gencies should (cid:196)nd out what disaster-
affected  populations  consider  the  most  appropriate  form(s)  of  transfer 
through informed consultations (see Food security – livelihoods standard 2 
on page 208).

7.  Targeting  in  cash  and  voucher  transfer  programmes:  The  challenges 
can  be  as  signi(cid:196)cant  for  in-kind  commodities  and  services,  but  due  to 
the  attractiveness  of  cash  and  vouchers,  particular  attention  is  needed  to 
minimise  exclusion  and  inclusion  errors.  People  can  be  reached  either  by 
direct  targeting  (to  the  disaster-affected  households  or  population)  or  by 
indirect targeting (e.g. local traders or service providers). Insecure conditions 
may  require  an  indirect  targeting  approach  (see  Protection  Principle  1  on 
page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16). Gender affects decisions on the household member registered to 
receive cash or vouchers, as with in-kind transfers (cid:15)see Food security (cid:182) food 
transfers standard (cid:28) on page 19(cid:25)(cid:16). Coordination with stakeholders, including 
government welfare and social protection programmes providing cash trans-
fers, is essential for targeting (cid:15)as for in-kind transfers(cid:16).

8.  Monitoring  of  cash  and  voucher  transfers:  Baseline  information  is 
re(cid:88)uired,  with  monitoring  before,  during  and  after  transfer  programmes, 
taking  into  account  the  direct  and  indirect  impacts  of  cash  and  vouchers 
in the market. Changes in the intervention should respond to the changes 
of the context and market situation. Monitoring should include prices of key 
goods, multiplier effects in local economies and price (cid:197)uctuations. (cid:50)ey (cid:88)ues-
tions  are:  What  are  people  buying  with  the  cash  and  vouchers  provided? 
Can people receive and spend cash safely? Are cash and vouchers being 
diverted(cid:38) (cid:43)o women in(cid:197)uence how the cash or voucher is spent (cid:15)see Core 
Standard (cid:28) on page (cid:29)(cid:31)(cid:16).

4.3.  Food security – livelihoods

The  resilience  of  people’s  livelihoods  and  their  vulnerability  to  food  insecurity 
are largely determined by the resources (or assets) available to them and how 
these have been affected by a disaster. These resources include (cid:196)nancial capital 
(cid:15)such  as  cash,  credit,  savings(cid:16)  and  also  include  physical  (cid:15)houses,  machinery(cid:16), 
natural (cid:15)land, water(cid:16), human (cid:15)labour, skills(cid:16), social (cid:15)networks, norms(cid:16) and political 

203

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

(cid:15)in(cid:197)uence, policy(cid:16) capital. (cid:50)ey to those who produce food is whether they have 
access to land that can support production and whether they have the means to 
continue to farm. (cid:50)ey to those who need income to get their food is whether they 
have access to employment, markets and services. For people affected by disas-
ters, the preservation, recovery and development of the resources necessary for 
their food security and future livelihoods should be a priority.

Prolonged political instability, insecurity and the threat of con(cid:197)ict may seriously 
restrict  livelihood  activities  and  access  to  markets.  Households  may  have  to 
abandon their plots and may lose assets, whether left behind, destroyed or taken 
by warring parties.

The three standards relate to primary production, income generation and employ-
ment, and access to markets, including goods and services.

Food security – livelihoods standard 1: Primary production

Primary production mechanisms are protected and supported.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Base the interventions to support primary production on livelihoods assess-
ment, context analysis and a demonstrated understanding of the viability of 
production systems, including access to and availability of necessary inputs, 
services and market demand (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

Introduce new technologies only where their implications for local production 
systems, cultural practices and the natural environment are understood and 
accepted by food producers and local consumers (see guidance note 2).

Provide production inputs or cash to purchase a range of inputs in order to 
give producers (cid:197)exibility in devising strategies and managing their production 
and reducing risks (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 » (cid:43)eliver  inputs  on  time,  ensure  they  are  locally  acceptable  and  conform  to 

appropriate (cid:88)uality norms (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:27)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

 »

Introduce  inputs  and  services  with  care,  not  to  exacerbate  vulnerability  or 
increase risk, e.g. by increasing competition for scarce natural resources or 
by damaging existing social networks (see guidance note 6).

Train food producers in better management practices where possible and 
appropriate (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:25), (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

204

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

 »

Purchase inputs and services locally whenever possible, unless this would 
adversely  affect  local  producers,  markets  or  consumers  (cid:15)see  guidance 
note 7).

 » Carry out regular monitoring to assess whether production inputs are used 

appropriately by bene(cid:196)ciaries (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:31)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

All households with assessed needs have access to the necessary inputs to 
protect and restart primary production to the level pre-disaster, when justi(cid:196)ed, 
and in accordance with the agricultural calendar (see guidance notes 1–6).

 »

(cid:40)ll targeted households are given cash or vouchers, where it is considered 
(cid:15)or assessed(cid:16) to be operationally viable, at market value of re(cid:88)uired inputs, 
giving households choices on livelihoods options (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26), (cid:28) 
and 7).

Guidance notes
1.  Viability of primary production: To be viable, food production strategies 
must have a reasonable chance of developing adequately and succeeding 
(see Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards (LEGS) in References 
and  further  reading(cid:16).  This  may  be  in(cid:197)uenced  by  a  wide  range  of  factors 
including:

 - access  to  suf(cid:196)cient  natural  resources  (cid:15)farmland,  pasture,  fodder,  water, 
rivers, lakes, coastal waters, etc.(cid:16). The ecological balance should not be 
endangered,  e.g.  by  over-exploitation  of  marginal  lands,  over-(cid:196)shing  or 
pollution of water, especially in peri-urban areas

 - levels  of  skills  and  capacities,  which  may  be  limited  where  populations 
are seriously affected by disease or where education and training may be 
barred to some groups

 - labour  availability  in  relation  to  existing  patterns  of  production  and  the 

timing of key agricultural and aquaculture activities

 - availability and access to the inputs needed for agricultural and aquacul-

ture production.

The  pre-disaster  level  of  production  may  not  have  been  a  good  one  and 
attempting  to  return  to  it  could  contradict  the  ‘do  no  harm’  principle  (see 
Protection Principle 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).

2.  Technological  development:  ‘New’  technologies  may  include  improved 
crop varieties, livestock or (cid:196)sh-stock species, new tools, fertilisers or inno-
vative  management  practices.  (cid:40)s  far  as  possible,  food  production  activi-
ties  should  build  on  or  strengthen  existing  patterns  and/or  be  linked  with 

205

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

3. 

national  development  plans.  New  technologies  should  only  be  introduced 
after a disaster if they have previously been tested in the local area and are 
known to be adapted and acceptable to bene(cid:196)ciaries. When introduced, new 
technologies should be accompanied by appropriate community consulta-
tions, provision of information, training and other relevant support. Wherever 
possible this should be done in coordination with private and public exten-
sion providers and input suppliers to ensure ongoing support and accessi-
bility to the technology in the future and, critically, commercial viability.

Improving choice: Interventions that offer producers greater choice include 
cash or credit in lieu of (cid:15)or to complement(cid:16) productive inputs, and seed and 
livestock fairs using vouchers that provide farmers with the opportunity to 
select seed or livestock of the varieties and species of their choice. Support 
to  production  should  assess  potential  implications  for  nutrition,  including 
access to nutritient-rich food through own production or through cash gener-
ated by this production. The provision of animal fodder during drought can 
provide a more direct human nutrition bene(cid:196)t to pastoralists than the provi-
sion of food transfers to people. The feasibility of transferring cash to house-
holds in order to provide access to production inputs should be based on 
availability of goods locally, access to markets and availability of a safe and 
affordable transfer mechanism.

4.  Timeliness  and  acceptability:  Examples  of  production  inputs  include 
seeds,  tools,  fertiliser,  livestock,  (cid:196)shing  e(cid:88)uipment,  hunting  implements, 
loans  and  credit  facilities,  market  information  and  transport  facilities.  (cid:40)n 
alternative to in-kind inputs is to provide cash or vouchers to enable people 
to purchase inputs of their choice. The provision of agricultural inputs and 
veterinary services must be timed to coincide with the relevant agricultural 
and animal husbandry seasons. For example, provision of seeds and tools 
must precede the planting season and emergency destocking of livestock 
during drought should take place before excess livestock mortality occurs, 
while restocking should start when recovery is well assured, e.g. following 
the next rains.

5.  Seeds:  Priority  should  be  given  to  seed  of  crops  and  varieties  that  are 
already in local use, so that farmers can use their own criteria to establish 
quality. Crops on offer should be those of highest priority for the upcoming 
season. Speci(cid:196)c varieties should be approved by farmers and local agricul-
tural experts. Minimally, seeds should be adapted to the local agro-ecology 
and to farmers(cid:187) own management conditions, be disease resistant and be 
chosen with consideration of future climate change scenarios such as (cid:197)oods 
or  droughts  and  sea-level  rise.  Seeds  originating  from  outside  the  region 
need to be adequately tested for quality and checked for appropriateness 
to local conditions. Farmers should be given access to a range of crops and 

206

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

6. 

varieties in any seed-related intervention so that they themselves can strat-
egise about what is best for their particular farming system. Hybrid seeds 
may be appropriate where farmers are familiar with them and have experi-
ence in growing them. This can only be determined through consultation with 
the population. When seeds are provided free of charge and farmers grow 
mai(cid:97)e, farmers may prefer hybrid seeds to local varieties because these are 
otherwise costly to purchase. Government policies regarding hybrid seeds 
should also be complied with before distribution. Genetically modi(cid:196)ed (cid:15)GMO(cid:16) 
seeds should not be distributed unless they have been approved by the local 
authorities. In such cases, farmers should also be aware that the aid contains 
GMO seed.

Impact on rural livelihoods: Primary food production may not be viable if 
there is a shortage of vital natural resources (and may not be viable for the 
long term if they were on the decline before the disaster) or lack of access 
for  certain  populations  (e.g.  landless  people).  Promoting  production  that 
requires increased (or changed) access to locally available natural resources 
may heighten tensions within the local population, which in turn can restrict 
access  to  water  and  other  essential  needs.  Care  should  be  taken  when 
providing  resources,  whether  in-kind  or  cash,  that  these  do  not  increase 
security risks for recipients or create con(cid:197)ict (cid:15)see Food security (cid:182) livelihoods 
standard  2  on  page  208  and  Food  security  –  cash  and  voucher  transfers 
standard 1 on page (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16). (cid:40)lso, the free provision of inputs may disturb tradi-
tional  mechanisms  for  social  support  and  redistribution  while  pushing  the 
private sector out of business and jeopardising future access to inputs.

7.  Local purchase of inputs: Inputs and services for food production, such as 
veterinary services and seed, should be obtained through existing local legal 
and veri(cid:196)able supply systems where possible. To support the local private 
sector,  mechanisms  such  as  cash  or  vouchers  should  be  used,  linking 
primary producers directly to suppliers. In designing such systems to enable 
local  purchase,  availability  of  appropriate  inputs  and  suppliers(cid:187)  ability  to 
increase supply should be considered, given the risk of in(cid:197)ation (cid:15)e.g. raising 
prices  of  scarce  items)  and  quality  of  inputs.  Direct  provision  of  imported 
inputs should only be undertaken when local alternatives are not feasible.

8.  Monitoring usage: Indicators of the process and outputs from food produc-
tion,  processing  and  distribution  may  be  estimated,  e.g.  area  planted, 
(cid:88)uantity of seed planted per hectare, yield and number of livestock offspring. 
It is important to determine how producers use the inputs (i.e. verifying that 
seeds are indeed planted and that tools, fertilisers, nets and (cid:196)shing gear are 
used as intended) or how cash is spent on inputs. The quality of the inputs 
should also be reviewed in terms of their performance, their acceptability and 
the  preferences  of  producers.  Important  for  evaluation  is  consideration  of 
how the project has affected food available to the household, e.g. household 

207

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

food  stocks,  the  (cid:88)uantity  and  (cid:88)uality  of  food  consumed  or  the  amount  of 
food traded or given away. Where the project aims to increase production of 
a speci(cid:196)c food type, such as animal or (cid:196)sh products or protein-rich legumes, 
the households’ use of these products should be investigated.

Food security – livelihoods standard 2: Income and employment

Where  income  generation  and  employment  are  feasible  livelihood 
strategies,  women  and  men  have  e(cid:88)ual  access  to  appropriate 
income-earning opportunities.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Base the decisions on income-generation activities on a market assessment 
and on an adequate participatory analysis of the capabilities of households 
to engage in the activities (see guidance notes 1–2).

 »

 »

 »

 »

(cid:41)ase the type of remuneration (cid:15)cash, voucher, food or a combination of these(cid:16) 
on sound analysis of local capacities, immediate needs, market systems and 
the disaster-affected population(cid:187)s preferences (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

(cid:41)ase the level of remuneration on needs, objectives for livelihoods restoration 
and local labour rates (see guidance note 4).

Ensure  procedures  to  provide  a  safe,  secure  working  environment  are  in 
place (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Take  measures  to  avoid  diversion  and/or  insecurity  when  involving  large 
sums of cash (see guidance note 6).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

All  the  targeted  people  generate  incomes  through  their  activities  and 
contribute to meeting their basic and other livelihoods needs.

 »

 »

Responses  providing  employment  opportunities  are  equally  available  to 
women and men and do not negatively affect the local market or negatively 
impact on normal livelihood activities (see guidance note 7).

Populations are kept aware of and understand remuneration as a contribution 
towards the food security of all household members equally (see guidance 
note 8).

Guidance notes
1.  Appropriateness of initiatives: A market analysis is fundamental to justify 
and  de(cid:196)ne  activities.  Existing  tools  to  understand  markets  and  economic 

208

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

systems  should  be  used  (see  markets  section  in  References  and  further 
reading). There should be maximum use of local human resources in project 
design and the identi(cid:196)cation of appropriate activities. (cid:40)lternatives for certain 
groups (cid:15)such as pregnant women, persons with disabilities or older people(cid:16) 
should  be  discussed  within  the  targeted  group.  Where  there  are  large 
numbers of displaced people (cid:15)refugees or internally displaced persons(cid:16), there 
should be consideration of opportunities to provide employment and skills 
to both displaced people and hosts. Locations for activities should consider 
the threat of attacks, risks to safety (cid:15)such as mined areas(cid:16) and environmen-
tally  unsuitable  areas  (cid:15)e.g.  land  that  is  contaminated  or  polluted,  prone  to 
subsidence or (cid:197)ooding, or excessively steep(cid:16) (cid:15)see Protection Principles 1(cid:182)(cid:26) 
on pages (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:16).

2. 

Income  transfers  to  households  with  limited  capacities  to  partici-
pate: While many households may be able to make use of employment and 
income-generation activities, the effect of disaster on some households may 
not  allow  them  to  take  advantage  of  these  opportunities  or  the  period  for 
receiving adequate returns may be too long for some. Safety-net measures 
such as unconditional cash and/or food transfers should be considered for 
such households, with a plan to either link up with existing social protection 
systems or advocate for new safety nets where needed.

3.  Type of remuneration: Remuneration may be in cash or in food or a combi-
nation of these and should enable food insecure households to meet their 
needs. Rather than payment for community works, remuneration may take 
the form of an incentive to help people to undertake tasks of direct bene(cid:196)t to 
themselves. People’s purchasing needs and the impact of giving either cash 
or food for other basic needs (cid:15)such as school, access to health services and 
social obligations) should be considered. The type and level of remuneration 
should be decided case-by-case, taking account of the factors above, the 
availability of cash and food and possible impact on local labour markets.

4.  Payments: There are no universally accepted guidelines for setting levels of 
remuneration, but where remuneration is in-kind and provided as an income 
transfer, the resale value (cid:15)e.g. of food(cid:16) on local markets must be considered. 
The  net  gain  in  income  to  individuals  through  participation  in  programme 
activities should be greater than if they had spent their time on other activities. 
This  applies  to  food  and  cash  for  work  activities  and  also  credit,  business 
start-ups,  etc.  Income-earning  opportunities  should  enhance  the  range  of 
income sources and not replace existing sources. Remuneration should not 
have a negative impact on local labour markets, e.g. by causing wage rate 
in(cid:197)ation, diverting labour from other activities or undermining essential public 
services.

5.  Risk in the work environment: A high-risk working environment should be 
avoided by practical procedures for minimising risk or treating injuries, e.g. 

209

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

brie(cid:196)ngs, protective clothing and (cid:196)rst-aid kits, where necessary. This should 
include minimising the risk of HI(cid:61) exposure. Practices for increasing safety in 
transit include securing safe access routes to work, ensuring routes are well 
lit, providing torches, using early warning systems (cid:15)which may utilise bells, 
whistles,  radios  and  other  devices(cid:16)  and  security  norms,  such  as  travelling 
in groups or avoiding travel after dark. Particular attention must be paid to 
women, girls and others at risk of sexual assault. Ensure that all participants 
are aware of emergency procedures and can access early warning systems 
(cid:15)see Protection Principles 1 and (cid:26) on pages (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:16).

6.  Risk of insecurity and diversion: Handing out resources in the form of food 
or cash for work (e.g. loans or payments for work done) introduces security 
concerns for both programme staff and the recipients (see Food security – 
food transfers standard (cid:28), guidance note (cid:29) on page 19(cid:28) and Food security 
(cid:182) cash and voucher transfers standard 1, guidance note (cid:27) on page (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16).

7.  Caring  responsibilities  and  livelihoods:  Participation  in  income-earning 
opportunities  should  not  undermine  childcare  or  other  caring  responsibili-
ties as this could increase the risk of undernutrition and other health risks. 
Programmes may need to consider employing care-providers or providing 
care facilities. It may not be appropriate to introduce increased workloads 
into people(cid:187)s lives, especially women(cid:187)s. Programmes should not adversely 
affect access to other opportunities, such as other employment or educa-
tion,  or  divert  household  resources  from  productive  activities  already  in 
place. Participation in income generation should respect national laws for the 
minimum age for admission to employment, usually not less than the age of 
completion of compulsory schooling.

8.  Use  of  remuneration:  Fair  remuneration  means  that  the  income  gener-
ated  contributes  a  signi(cid:196)cant  proportion  of  the  resources  necessary  for 
food security. Household management of cash or food transfers (including 
intra-household distribution and end uses(cid:16) must be understood, because the 
way they are distributed can either exacerbate or diffuse existing tensions, 
affecting  the  food  security  of  household  members  differently.  Responses 
that  generate  income  and  employment  often  have  multiple  food  security 
objectives,  including  community-level  resources  that  affect  food  security. 
For example, repairing roads may improve access to markets and access 
to healthcare, while repairing or constructing water-harvesting and irrigation 
systems may improve productivity.

210

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Food security – livelihoods standard 3: Access to markets

The disaster-affected population’s safe access to market goods and 
services  as  producers,  consumers  and  traders  is  protected  and 
promoted.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Protect and reinforce access to affordable operating markets for producers, 
consumers and traders (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

 »

Base  food  security  and  livelihoods  responses  on  a  demonstrated  under-
standing of whether local markets are functioning or are disrupted, as well as 
their potential for strengthening (see guidance note 2).

Base advocacy for improvements and policy changes on the market analysis 
conducted before each intervention (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Take steps to promote and support market access for vulnerable people (see 
guidance note 4).

 » Control  the  adverse  effects  of  responses,  including  food  purchases  and 

distribution, on local markets (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

 » Minimise the negative consequences of extreme seasonal or other abnormal 

price (cid:197)uctuations on markets (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:29)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Interventions are designed to support the recovery of markets, either through 
direct intervention or through the promotion of local traders via cash and/or 
voucher programmes.

 »

(cid:40)ll targeted populations have safe and full access to market goods, services 
and systems throughout the duration of the programme.

Guidance notes
1.  Market demand and supply: Economic access to markets is in(cid:197)uenced by 
purchasing  power,  market  prices  and  availability.  (cid:40)ffordability  depends  on 
the terms of trade between basic needs (cid:15)food, essential agricultural inputs 
such  as  seeds,  tools,  healthcare,  etc.(cid:16)  and  income  sources  (cid:15)cash  crops, 
livestock, wages, etc.(cid:16). Erosion of assets occurs when deterioration of trade 
forces people to sell assets (often at low prices) in order to buy basic needs 
(cid:15)at in(cid:197)ated prices(cid:16). (cid:40)ccess to markets may also be in(cid:197)uenced by the political 

211

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

and security environment and by cultural or religious considerations, which 
restrict access by certain groups such as minorities.

2.  Market  analysis:  Consideration  should  be  given  to  access  to  functioning 
markets for all affected people, including vulnerable individuals. Responses 
that  remunerate  in  cash,  vouchers  or  food  or  provide  inputs  should  be 
preceded  by  an  appropriate  level  of  market  analysis  for  the  commodity 
supplied.  Local  purchase  of  surpluses  will  support  local  producers  but 
adverse  risks  also  need  to  be  identi(cid:196)ed.  Imports  are  likely  to  reduce  local 
prices  (cid:15)see  Food  security  and  nutrition  assessment  standard  1,  guidance 
note 7 on page 1(cid:28)(cid:25)(cid:16).

3.  Advocacy:  Markets  operate  in  the  wider  national  and  global  economies, 
which in(cid:197)uence local market conditions. For example, governmental policies, 
including  pricing  and  trade  policies,  in(cid:197)uence  access  and  availability. 
(cid:40)lthough  actions  at  this  level  are  beyond  the  scope  of  disaster  response, 
these factors should be analysed as there may be opportunities for a joint 
agency  approach  or  to  advocate  for  improvements  with  government  and 
other organisations (cid:15)see Protection Principle (cid:26) on page (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:16).

4.  Vulnerable  people:  (cid:61)ulnerability  analysis  to  identify  the  people  who  have 
restricted access to markets and livelihood opportunities should be carried 
out. Persons with disabilities, PLHI(cid:61), older people and women with caring 
responsibilities must be supported to access markets.

5. 

Impact  of  interventions:  Local  procurement  of  food,  seeds  or  other 
commodities  may  cause  local  in(cid:197)ation  to  the  disadvantage  of  consumers 
but to the bene(cid:196)t of local producers. Conversely, imported food may drive 
prices down and act as a disincentive to local food production, potentially 
increasing  food  insecurity.  Provision  of  cash  may  have  positive  multiplier 
effects in local economies but could also cause local in(cid:197)ation for key goods. 
Those responsible for procurement should monitor these effects and take 
them into account. Food distribution could also affect the purchasing power 
of bene(cid:196)ciaries, as it is a form of income transfer. Some commodities are 
easier to sell for a good price than others, e.g. oil versus blended food. The 
(cid:186)purchasing power(cid:187) associated with a given food or food basket will in(cid:197)uence 
whether it is eaten or sold by the bene(cid:196)ciary household. (cid:40)n understanding of 
household sales and purchases is important in determining the wider impact 
of food distribution programmes.

6.  Abnormally  extreme  seasonal  price  ﬂuctuations  may  adversely  affect 
poor agricultural producers, who have to sell their produce when prices are 
at their lowest (usually just after harvest) or livestock owners who are forced 
to  sell  during  drought.  Conversely,  consumers  who  have  little  disposable 
income cannot afford to invest in food stocks, depending instead on small 

212

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

but fre(cid:88)uent purchases. Therefore, they are forced to buy even when prices 
are high (e.g. during drought). Examples of interventions which can minimise 
these  effects  include  improved  transport  and  storage  systems,  diversi(cid:196)ed 
food production and cash or food transfers at critical times.

213

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 1
Food security and livelihoods assessment checklists

Food security assessments often broadly categorise the affected population into 
livelihood groupings, according to their sources of, and strategies for, obtaining 
income or food. This may also include a breakdown of the population according 
to wealth groups or strata. It is important to compare the prevailing situation with 
the history of food security pre-disaster. So-called ‘average normal years’ may 
be considered as a baseline. The speci(cid:196)c roles and vulnerabilities of women and 
men, and the implications for household food security should be considered.

The following checklist questions cover the broad areas that are usually consid-
ered in a food security assessment.

1 Food security of livelihood groups
 »

Are there groups in the population who share the same livelihood strategies? 
How can these be categorised according to their main sources of food or 
income?

2 Food security pre-disaster (baseline)
 » How did the different livelihood groups acquire food or income before the 
disaster(cid:38) For an average year in the recent past, what were their sources of 
food and income?

 » How did these different sources of food and income vary between seasons in 

a normal year? (Constructing a seasonal calendar may be useful.)

 »

Looking back over the past (cid:196)ve or ten years, how has food security varied 
from year to year? (Constructing a timeline or history of good and bad years 
may be useful.)

 » What kind of assets, savings or other reserves are owned by the different 
livelihood groups (cid:15)e.g. food stocks, cash savings, livestock holdings, invest-
ments, credit, unclaimed debt, etc.(cid:16)(cid:38)

 » Over a period of a week or a month, what do household expenditures include 

and what proportion is spent on each item?

214

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

 » Who is responsible for management of cash in the household and on what 

is cash spent?

 » How accessible is the nearest market for obtaining basic goods? (Consider 
distance, security, ease of mobility, availability of market information, trans-
port, etc.(cid:16)

 » What is the availability and price of essential goods, including food(cid:38)

 »

Prior to the disaster, what were the average terms of trade between essential 
sources of income and food, e.g. wages to food, livestock to food, etc.(cid:38)

3 Food security during disaster
 » How has the disaster affected the different sources of food and income for 

each of the livelihood groups identi(cid:196)ed(cid:38)

 » How  has  it  affected  the  usual  seasonal  patterns  of  food  security  for  the 

different groups?

 » How  has  it  affected  access  to  markets,  market  availability  and  prices  of 

essential goods?

 »

For different livelihood groups, what are the different coping strategies and 
what proportion of people are engaged in them?

 » How has this changed as compared with the pre-disaster situation?

 » Which group or population is most affected?

 » What are the short- and medium-term effects of coping strategies on people’s 

(cid:196)nancial and other assets(cid:38)

 »

For all livelihood groups, and all vulnerable people, what are the effects of 
coping strategies on their health, general well-being and dignity(cid:38) (cid:40)re there 
risks associated with coping strategies?

215

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 2
Seed security assessment checklist

Below are sample questions for seed security assessments:

1. Pre-disaster (baseline)
 » What  are  farmers’  most  important  crops?  What  do  they  use  them  for  – 
consumption, income or both(cid:38) (cid:40)re these crops grown each season(cid:38) What 
lesser crops might become important in times of stress?

 » How do farmers usually get seed or other planting material for these crops? 

(Consider all the channels.)

 » What are the sowing parameters for each major crop? What is the average 
area planted? What are the seeding rates? What are the multiplication rates 
(ratios of seed or grain harvested to seed planted)?

 »

(cid:40)re there important or preferred varieties of speci(cid:196)c crops(cid:38)

 » Which production inputs are essential for particular crops or varieties?

 » Who in the household is responsible for decision-making, managing crops 
and  disposing  of  crop  products  at  different  stages  of  production  and 
post-production?

2. After disaster
 »

Is a farming-related intervention feasible from the bene(cid:196)ciaries(cid:187) point of view(cid:38)

 »

(cid:40)re  farmers  con(cid:196)dent  the  situation  is  now  stable  and  secure  enough  that 
they can successfully cultivate, harvest and sell or consume a crop(cid:38)

 » (cid:43)o  they  have  suf(cid:196)cient  access  to  (cid:196)elds  and  other  means  of  production 

(cid:15)manure, implements, draught animals(cid:16)(cid:38)

 »

Are they prepared to re-engage in agriculture?

216

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

3. Assessing seed supply and demand: home stocks
 »

Are adequate amounts of home-produced seed available for sowing? This 
includes both seed from a farmer’s own harvest and seed potentially avail-
able through social networks (e.g. neighbours).

 »

 »

Is this a crop that farmers still want to plant? Is it adapted to local conditions? 
Is there still a demand for it?

Are the varieties available through a farmer’s own production still suitable for 
planting next season? Does the quality of the seed meet the farmer’s normal 
standards?

4. Assessing seed supply and demand: local markets
 »

Are markets generally functioning despite the disaster (are market days being 
held, are farmers able to move, sell and buy freely(cid:16)(cid:38)

 »

 »

 »

Are current volumes of available seed or grain comparable to those under 
normal conditions at the same time during previous seasons?

(cid:40)re crops and varieties that farmers (cid:196)nd suitable for growing found in the 
markets?

Are current market prices of seed or grain comparable to the prices at the 
same time in previous seasons(cid:38) If there is a price differential, is the magni-
tude likely to be a problem for farmers?

5. Assessing seed supply and demand: formal sector seed
 »

Are  the  crops  and  varieties  on  offer  from  the  formal  sector  adapted  to 
particular stress zones? Is there evidence farmers like them?

 » Can the amounts of formal sector seed available meet any need for aid? If 

not, what proportion of farmers(cid:187) needs could be covered(cid:38)

217

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 3
Nutrition assessment checklist

Below are sample questions for assessments examining the underlying causes of 
undernutrition, the level of nutrition risk and possibilities for response. The (cid:88)ues-
tions  are  based  on  the  conceptual  framework  of  the  causes  of  undernutrition 
(see page 146). The information is likely to be available from a variety of sources 
and  gathering  it  will  re(cid:88)uire  various  assessment  tools,  including  key  informant 
interviews, observation and review of secondary data (cid:15)see also Core Standards 
1, (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27) on pages (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:16).

Pre-emergency situation
What information already exists on the nature, scale and causes of undernutri-
tion among the affected population (see Food security and nutrition assessment 
standard (cid:25) on page 1(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:16)(cid:38)

The current risk of undernutrition
1. 

 The risk of undernutrition related to reduced food access – see Appendix 1: 
Food security and livelihoods assessment checklists.
 The risk of undernutrition related to infant and young child feeding and care 
practices:
 - Is  there  a  change  in  work  and  social  patterns  (cid:15)e.g.  due  to  migration, 
displacement or armed con(cid:197)ict(cid:16) which means that roles and responsibili-
ties in the household have changed?

 - Is there a change in the normal composition of households? Are there large 

numbers of separated children?

 - Has the normal care environment been disrupted (e.g. through displace-
ment(cid:16),  affecting  access  to  secondary  caregivers,  access  to  foods  for 
children, access to water, etc.(cid:38)

 - (cid:40)re any infants not breastfed(cid:38) (cid:40)re there infants who are arti(cid:196)cially fed(cid:38)
 - Has there been any evidence or suspicion of a decline in infant feeding 
practices in the emergency, especially any fall in breastfeeding initiation or 
exclusive breastfeeding rates, any increase in arti(cid:196)cial feeding rate and(cid:22)or 
any increase in proportion of infants not breastfed?

2. 

218

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

(cid:26). 

4. 

 - (cid:40)re  age-appropriate,  nutritionally  ade(cid:88)uate,  safe  complementary  foods 

and the means to prepare them hygienically accessible?

 - Is  there  any  evidence  or  suspicion  of  general  distribution  of  breastmilk 
substitutes such as infant formula, other milk products, bottles and teats, 
either donated or purchased?

 - In pastoral communities, have the herds been away from young children for 

long? Has access to milk changed from normal?

 - Has HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S affected caring practices at household level(cid:38)

 The risk of undernutrition related to poor public health (see Health chapter 
on page 287):
 - Are  there  any  reports  of  disease  outbreaks  which  may  affect  nutritional 
status,  such  as  measles  or  acute  diarrhoeal  disease(cid:38)  Is  there  risk  that 
these  outbreaks  will  occur?  (See  Essential  health  services  –  control  of 
communicable diseases standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages (cid:26)1(cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26)1(cid:29).(cid:16)

 - What  is  the  estimated  measles  vaccination  coverage  of  the  affected 
population?  (See  Essential  health  services  –  child  health  standard  1  on 
page (cid:26)(cid:25)1.(cid:16)

 - Is  (cid:61)itamin  (cid:40)  routinely  given  with  measles  vaccination(cid:38)  What  is  the  esti-

mated (cid:61)itamin (cid:40) supplementation coverage(cid:38)

 - (cid:40)re there any estimates of mortality rates (cid:15)either crude or under-(cid:28)(cid:16)(cid:38) What 
are they and what method has been used? (See Essential health services 
standard 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:23)9.(cid:16)

 - Is there, or will there be, a signi(cid:196)cant decline in ambient temperature which 
is likely to affect the prevalence of acute respiratory infection or the energy 
requirements of the affected population?

 - Is there a high prevalence of HI(cid:61)(cid:38)
 - Are people already vulnerable to undernutrition due to poverty or ill health?
 - Is there overcrowding or a risk of or high prevalence of TB?
 - Is there a high incidence of malaria?
 - Have people been in water or wet clothes or exposed to other harsh envi-

ronmental conditions for long periods of time?

  What  formal  and  informal  local  structures  are  currently  in  place  through 
which potential interventions could be channelled?
 - What  is  the  capacity  of  the  Ministry  of  Health,  religious  organisations, 
community support groups, breastfeeding support groups or NGOs with a 
long- or short-term presence in the area?

 - What nutrition interventions or community-based support were already in 
place and organised by local communities, individuals, NGOs, government 
organisations,  (cid:60)N  agencies,  religious  organisations,  etc.(cid:38)  What  are  the 
nutrition policies (cid:15)past, ongoing and lapsed(cid:16), the planned long-term nutri-
tion responses and programmes that are being implemented or planned in 
response to the current situation?

219

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 4
Measuring acute malnutrition

In major nutritional emergencies, it may be necessary to include infants aged less 
than (cid:29) months, pregnant and breastfeeding women, older children, adolescents, 
adults or older people in nutrition assessments or nutritional programmes.

Surveys  of  age  groups  other  than  children  aged  (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9  months  should  only  be 
undertaken if:

 »

 »

 »

a thorough contextual analysis of the situation is undertaken, including an 
analysis  of  the  causes  of  malnutrition.  Only  if  the  results  of  this  analysis 
suggest that the nutritional status of young children does not re(cid:197)ect the nutri-
tional status of the general population should a nutrition survey for another 
age group be considered

technical  expertise  is  available  to  ensure  a  high  (cid:88)uality  of  data  collection, 
adequate analysis and correct presentation and interpretation of results

the  resource  and/or  opportunity  costs  of  including  other  age  groups  in  a 
survey have been considered

 »

clear and well-documented objectives for the survey are formulated.

Infants under 6 months
While  research  is  ongoing  for  this  age  group,  the  evidence  base  for  assess-
ment  and  management  is  currently  limited.  Most  guidelines  recommend  the 
same  anthropometric  case  de(cid:196)nitions  of  acute  infant  malnutrition  as  for  older 
children  aged  (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9  months  (cid:15)except  for  mid  upper  arm  circumference  (cid:15)M(cid:60)(cid:40)C(cid:16) 
which is not presently recommended for infants (cid:35)(cid:29) months(cid:16). (cid:40)dmission criteria 
focus  on  current  size  rather  than  an  assessment  of  growth.  The  switch  from 
NCHS growth references to WHO 2006 growth standards results in more cases 
of infant (cid:35)(cid:29) month wasting. The implications of this change should be consid-
ered and addressed. Potential issues include more infants presenting to feeding 
programmes or caregivers becoming concerned about the adequacy of exclu-
sive breastfeeding. It is important to assess and consider:

220

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

 - the infants longitudinal growth – is the rate of growth good despite body 
size being small (some infants may for example be ‘catching up’ following 
low birth weight)?

 - infant feeding practices – is the infant exclusively breastfeeding?
 - clinical status – does the infant have any medical complications or condi-

tions which are treatable or which make him/her high risk?

 - maternal  factors  –  e.g.  does  the  mother  lack  family  support  or  is  she 
depressed?  Inpatient  admission  to  therapeutic  feeding  programmes 
should be a priority for high risk infants.

Children 6–59 months
The  table  below  shows  the  commonly  used  indicators  of  different  grades  of 
malnutrition among children aged (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 months. Weight for height (cid:15)WFH(cid:16) indices 
should be calculated using the WHO (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29) child growth standards. The WFH (cid:65) 
score  (according  to  WHO  standards)  is  the  preferred  indicator  for  reporting 
anthropometric survey results. MUAC is an independent criterion for acute malnu-
trition and is one of the best predictors of mortality. The prevalence of low MUAC 
is also investigated in surveys to predict case loads for supplementary feeding 
and therapeutic care programmes. The cut-offs commonly used are (cid:35)11.(cid:28)cm for 
severe acute malnutrition, and 11.(cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:35)1(cid:25).(cid:28)cm for moderate acute malnutrition. It is 
also often used, with a higher cut-off, as part of a two-stage screening process. 
It should not be used alone in anthropometric surveys but can be used as sole 
admission criteria for feeding programmes.

Global acute 
malnutrition

Moderate acute 
malnutrition

Severe acute 
malnutrition

Children 
(cid:29).(cid:23)(cid:182)(cid:28)9.9 
months

WFH (cid:35)-(cid:25) (cid:65) score 
and/or
M(cid:60)(cid:40)C (cid:35)1(cid:25).(cid:28)cm
and/or
nutritional oedema

WFH -(cid:26) - (cid:35)-(cid:25) (cid:65) 
score
and/or
MUAC 
11.(cid:28)-(cid:35)1(cid:25).(cid:28)cm

WFH (cid:35)-(cid:26) (cid:65) score
and/or
M(cid:60)(cid:40)C (cid:35)11.(cid:28)cm
and/or
nutritional oedema

Children aged 5–19 years
Use  of  the  WHO  2007  growth  standards  is  recommended  to  determine  nutri-
tion  status  in  children  aged  (cid:28)(cid:182)19  years.  These  growth  reference  data  curves 
are a reconstruction of the 1977 NCHS/WHO reference and are closely aligned 
with the WHO child growth standards for children (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 months and the recom-
mended cut-offs for adults. The use of M(cid:60)(cid:40)C in older children and adolescents, 
particularly  in  the  context  of  HI(cid:61),  may  be  considered.  (cid:40)s  this  is  a  developing 
technical area, it is important to refer to latest guidance and technical updates.

221

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Adults (20–59.9 years)
There is no agreed de(cid:196)nition of acute malnutrition in adults, but evidence suggests 
that cut-offs for severe acute malnutrition could be lower than a body mass index 
(cid:15)(cid:41)MI(cid:16) of 1(cid:29) and lower than 1(cid:31).(cid:28) for mild and moderate acute malnutrition. Surveys 
of adult malnutrition should aim to gather data on weight, height, sitting height 
and MUAC measurements. These data can be used to calculate BMI. BMI should 
be adjusted for Cormic index (the ratio of sitting height to standing height) only 
to make comparisons between populations. Such adjustment can substantially 
change the apparent prevalence of undernutrition in adults and may have impor-
tant programmatic rami(cid:196)cations. M(cid:60)(cid:40)C measurements should always be taken. 
If immediate results are needed or resources are severely limited, surveys may be 
based on MUAC measurements alone.

Because the interpretation of anthropometric results is complicated by the lack of 
validated functional outcome data and benchmarks for determining the meaning 
of  the  result,  such  results  must  be  interpreted  along  with  detailed  contextual 
information.  Guidance  on  assessment  can  be  found  under  References  and 
further reading.

For  screening  individuals  for  nutritional  care  admission  and  discharge,  criteria 
should include a combination of anthropometric indices, clinical signs (cid:15)particu-
larly weakness, recent weight loss(cid:16) and social factors (cid:15)access to food, presence 
of caregivers, shelter, etc.(cid:16). Note that oedema in adults can be caused by a variety 
of reasons other than malnutrition, and clinicians should assess adult oedema 
to exclude other causes. Individual agencies should decide on the indicator to 
determine  eligibility  for  care,  taking  into  account  the  known  shortcomings  of 
BMI and the lack of information on MUAC and the programme implications of 
their use. (cid:40)s this is a developing technical area, it is important to refer to latest 
guidance and technical updates.

M(cid:60)(cid:40)C may be used as a screening tool for pregnant women, e.g. as a criterion for 
entry into a feeding programme. Given their additional nutritional needs, pregnant 
women may be at greater risk than other groups in the population. MUAC does 
not  change  signi(cid:196)cantly  through  pregnancy.  M(cid:60)(cid:40)C  (cid:35)(cid:25)(cid:23).7cm  (cid:15)severe  risk(cid:16)  and 
(cid:35)(cid:25)(cid:26)cm (cid:15)moderate risk(cid:16) have been shown to carry a risk of growth retardation of 
the foetus. Suggested cut-off points for risk vary by country and range from 21cm 
to (cid:25)(cid:26)cm. Less than (cid:25)1cm has been suggested as an appropriate cut-off for selec-
tion of women at risk during emergencies.

222

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Older people
There  is  currently  no  agreed  de(cid:196)nition  of  malnutrition  in  older  people  and  yet 
this group may be at risk of malnutrition in emergencies. WHO suggests that the 
BMI thresholds for adults may be appropriate for older people aged 60–69 years 
and above. However, accuracy of measurement is problematic because of spinal 
curvature (stooping) and compression of the vertebrae. Arm span or demi-span 
can  be  used  instead  of  height,  but  the  multiplication  factor  to  calculate  height 
varies according to the population. (cid:61)isual assessment is necessary. M(cid:60)(cid:40)C may 
be a useful tool for measuring malnutrition in older people but research on appro-
priate cut-offs is currently still in progress.

Persons with disabilities
No  guidelines  currently  exist  for  the  measurement  of  individuals  with  physical 
disabilities and therefore they are often excluded from anthropometric surveys. 
(cid:61)isual  assessment  is  necessary.  M(cid:60)(cid:40)C  measurements  may  be  misleading  in 
cases where upper arm muscle might build up to aid mobility. There are alter-
natives to standard measures of height, including length, arm span, demi-span 
or lower leg length. It is necessary to consult the latest research to determine 
the most appropriate way of measuring disabled individuals for whom standard 
weight, height and M(cid:60)(cid:40)C measurement is not appropriate.

223

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 5
Measures of the public health signiﬁcance of 
micronutrient deﬁciencies

Where clinical micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies are detected, they should be urgently 
treated on an individual basis. Individual cases of clinical micronutrient de(cid:196)cien-
cies  are  also  usually  indicative  of  an  underlying  problem  of  micronutrient  de(cid:196)-
ciency at the population level. Measurement and classi(cid:196)cation of micronutrient 
de(cid:196)ciencies  at  the  population  level  is  important  for  planning  and  monitoring 
interventions.

Biochemical tests have the advantage of providing objective measures of micro-
nutrient  status.  However,  the  collection  of  biological  samples  for  testing  often 
presents logistical, staff training, cold chain and sometimes acceptability chal-
lenges.  (cid:41)iochemical  measurements  are  also  not  always  as  clearly  useful,  i.e. 
as  sensitive  and  speci(cid:196)c,  as  might  be  imagined.  There  may  also  be  variations 
according to the time of day the sample is collected and according to the season 
of the year, as with acute malnutrition. Good (cid:88)uality control is essential and should 
always be considered when selecting a laboratory for sample testing.

When assessing micronutrient status the possibility of excessive intakes as well 
as de(cid:196)ciency should be kept in mind. This is of particular concern when multiple, 
highly forti(cid:196)ed products or supplements are used to deliver micronutrients to the 
affected population.

224

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

The table below shows classi(cid:196)cations of the public health signi(cid:196)cance of selected 
micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies using different indicators.

Micronutrient 
deﬁciency indicator

Recommended 
age group for 
prevalence 
surveys

Deﬁnition of a public health 
problem

Severity

Prevalence (%)

(cid:61)itamin (cid:40) de(cid:196)ciency 

Night blindness (XN)

24–71 months

Mild 

Moderate

Severe

(cid:37) (cid:23) (cid:182) (cid:35) 1

≥1 (cid:182) (cid:35) (cid:28)

≥ (cid:28)

Bitots spots (X1B)

6–71 months

Not speci(cid:196)ed

(cid:37) (cid:23).(cid:28)

Corneal Xerosis/ulceration/
keratomalacia (cid:15)(cid:63)(cid:25), (cid:63)(cid:26)(cid:40), 
(cid:63)(cid:26)(cid:41)(cid:16) 

6–71 months

Not speci(cid:196)ed

> 0.01

Corneal scars (XS)

6–71 months

Not speci(cid:196)ed

(cid:37) (cid:23).(cid:23)(cid:28)

Serum retinol  
(≤ 0.7 mmol/L)

Iodine de(cid:196)ciency

Goitre (visible + palpable)

6–71 months

Mild

Moderate

Severe

≥ (cid:25) (cid:182) (cid:35) 1(cid:23)

≥1(cid:23) (cid:182) (cid:35) (cid:25)(cid:23)

≥ 20

School-age 
children 

Mild

(cid:28).(cid:23) (cid:182) 19.9

Moderate

20.0 – 29.9

Median urinary iodine 
concentration (mg/l)

School-age 
children 

Severe

Excessive 
intake

Adequate 
intake 

Mild 
de(cid:196)ciency 

Moderate 
de(cid:196)ciency 

Severe 
de(cid:196)ciency 

≥ (cid:26)(cid:23).(cid:23)

(cid:37) (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23)1

100 – 1991

(cid:28)(cid:23) (cid:182) 991

20 – 491

(cid:35) (cid:25)(cid:23)1

225

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Micronutrient 
deﬁciency indicator

Recommended 
age group for 
prevalence 
surveys

Deﬁnition of a public health 
problem

Severity

Prevalence (%)

Iron de(cid:196)ciency

Anaemia 
(Non-pregnant women 
haemoglobin (cid:35)1(cid:25).(cid:23) g(cid:22)dl;  
children (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 months 
(cid:35)11.(cid:23) g(cid:22)dl(cid:16)

Beriberi1

Clinical signs

Dietary intake  
(cid:15)(cid:35) (cid:23).(cid:26)(cid:26) mg(cid:22)1(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) kcal(cid:16)

Women, children 
(cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 months

Low

Medium

High

(cid:28) (cid:182) (cid:25)(cid:23)

20 – 40

≥ 40

Whole population

Mild 

≥ 1 case (cid:13) (cid:35)1(cid:12)

Moderate

1 – 4

Severe

Whole population

Mild 

≥ (cid:28)

≥ (cid:28)

Moderate 

(cid:28) (cid:182) 19

Severe

20 – 49

Infant mortality

Infants (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:28) months Mild 

No increase in rates

Pellagra1

Clinical signs (dermatitis) in 
surveyed age group

Whole population 
or women (cid:37)1(cid:28) 
years

Dietary intake of niacin 
equivalents
(cid:35)(cid:28) mg(cid:22)day

Whole population 
or women (cid:37)1(cid:28) 
years

Moderate 

Slight peak in rates

Severe 

Marked peak in 
rates

Mild 

(cid:153) 1 case (cid:13) (cid:35)1(cid:12)

Moderate

Severe

Mild 

1 – 4

≥ (cid:28)

(cid:28) (cid:182) 19

Moderate

20 – 49

Severe

≥ (cid:28)(cid:23)

Scurvy1

Clinical signs

Whole population

Mild 

≥ 1 case (cid:13)(cid:35) 1(cid:12)

Moderate 

Severe 

1 – 4

≥ (cid:28)

1  For information about biochemical tests and public health thresholds consult the latest literature or seek specialist 

advice.

226

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Appendix 6 
Nutritional requirements

The following (cid:196)gures can be used for planning purposes in the initial stage of a 
disaster. The minimum nutrient requirements given in the table overleaf should 
be  used  to  assess  the  adequacy  of  general  rations  targeting  the  population.
Re(cid:88)uirements are calculated based on an assumed demographic pro(cid:196)le, assump-
tions about the ambient temperature and people’s activity levels. They also take 
into  account  the  additional  needs  of  pregnant  and  breastfeeding  women.  The 
requirements are not intended for assessing the adequacy of supplementary or 
therapeutic care rations or for assessing rations targeted at particular groups of 
people, such as individuals suffering from T(cid:41) or people living with HI(cid:61).

There are two important points to consider before using the requirements listed 
overleaf. Firstly, these average population minimum re(cid:88)uirements for population 
groups incorporate the requirements of all age groups and both sexes. They are 
therefore not speci(cid:196)c to any single age or sex group and should not be used as 
re(cid:88)uirements for an individual. Secondly, nutritional re(cid:88)uirements are based on a 
population pro(cid:196)le.

227

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Nutrient

Energy 

Protein 

Fat 

(cid:61)itamin (cid:40) 

(cid:61)itamin (cid:43) 

(cid:61)itamin E 

(cid:61)itamin (cid:50) 

(cid:61)itamin (cid:41)1 (cid:15)Thiamin(cid:16)

(cid:61)itamin (cid:41)(cid:25) (cid:15)Ribo(cid:197)avin(cid:16)

(cid:61)itamin (cid:41)(cid:26) (cid:15)Niacin(cid:16)

(cid:61)itamin (cid:41)(cid:29) (cid:15)Pyidoxine(cid:16)

(cid:61)itamin (cid:41)1(cid:25) (cid:15)Cobalamin(cid:16)

Folate

Pantothenate 

(cid:61)itamin C 

Iron 

Iodine

(cid:65)inc 

Copper

Selenium 

Calcium 

Magnesium

Minimum population 
requirements1

(cid:25),1(cid:23)(cid:23) kcals

(cid:28)(cid:26) g (cid:15)1(cid:23)(cid:12) of total energy(cid:16) 

(cid:27)(cid:23) g (cid:15)17(cid:12) of total energy(cid:16)

(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:23) (cid:155)g R(cid:40)E(cid:17)

(cid:29).1 (cid:155)g

(cid:31).(cid:23) mg alpha-TE(cid:17)

(cid:27)(cid:31).(cid:25) (cid:155)g

1.1 mg

1.1 mg 

1(cid:26).(cid:31) mg NE

1.2 mg

(cid:25).(cid:25) (cid:155)g

(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26) (cid:155)g (cid:43)FE(cid:17)

4.6 mg

41.6 mg

(cid:26)(cid:25) mg

1(cid:26)(cid:31) (cid:155)g

12.4 mg

1.1 mg

(cid:25)7.(cid:29) (cid:155)g

989 mg

201 mg

*  Alpha-TE - alpha-tocopherol equivalents 
RAE - retinol activity equivalents 
DFE - dietary folate equivalents
1 

 Expressed as reference nutrient intakes (RNI) for all nutrients except energy and copper.

Reference: RNI from FAO/WHO (2004), Vitamin and Mineral Requirements in Human Nutrition. Second edition, 
were used for all vitamin and mineral requirement calculations except copper, as requirements for this mineral were 
not included in FAO/WHO (2004). Requirements for copper are taken from WHO (1996), Trace Elements in Human 
Nutrition and Health.

228

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

The following table gives an indicator of the average global population structure 
broken down by age. However, it is important to note that this is context-speci(cid:196)c 
and can vary signi(cid:196)cantly. For example, in some rural communities, out-migration 
of middle generations has resulted in disproportionately high numbers of older 
people caring for children.

Group

0–6 months

7–11 months 

1(cid:182)(cid:26) years

4–6 years 

7–9 years 

10–18 years females

10–18 years males

19(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:23) females 

(cid:28)1(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:28) females 

19(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:28) males 

(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:18) females 

(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:18) males 

Pregnant 

Breastfeeding 

% of population

1.(cid:26)(cid:25)

(cid:23).9(cid:28)

(cid:29).(cid:28)(cid:31)

6.41

(cid:29).(cid:26)7

9.01

9.(cid:28)(cid:25)

17.42

4.72

27.90

2.62

2.18

2.40

2.60

Reference: United Nations (2003), World Population Prospects: The 2002 Revision, Interpolated Population by Sex, 
Single Years of Age and Single Calendar Years, 1950 to 2050.

The population energy requirements should be adjusted for the following factors: 

 - the demographic structure of the population, in particular the percentage 

of those under (cid:28) years of age and the percentage of females

 - mean adult weights and actual, usual or desirable body weights
 - activity  levels  to  maintain  productive  life  –  requirements  will  increase  if 

activity levels exceed light (i.e. 1.6 x Basal Metabolic Rate)

 - average ambient temperature and shelter and clothing capacities – require-

ments will increase if the mean ambient temperature is less than 20°C

229

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 - the  nutritional  and  health  status  of  the  population  –  requirements  will 
increase if the population is malnourished and has extra requirements for 
catch-up  growth.  HI(cid:61)  and  (cid:40)I(cid:43)S  prevalence  may  affect  average  popula-
tion requirements (see Food security – food transfers standard 1 on page 
180). Whether general rations should be adjusted to meet these needs will 
depend on contextual analysis and current international recommendations.

If it is not possible to gain this kind of information from assessments, the (cid:196)gures 
in the table above should be used as the minimum requirements.

230

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

References and  
further reading
Sources

(cid:41)lack  et  al  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Maternal  and  child  undernutrition  1.  Maternal  and  child 
undernutrition: global and regional exposures and health consequences. www.
thelancet.com, series, 17 (cid:49)anuary.
C(cid:40)RE (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), Coping Strategies Index: CSI Field Methods Manual.
Castleman,  T,  Seumo-Fasso,  E  and  Cogill,  (cid:41)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)  rev.(cid:16),  Food  and  Nutrition 
Implications of Antiretroviral Therapy in Resource Limited Settings. FANTA (Food 
and Nutrition Technical Assistance) technical note no. 7. Washington DC.
Coates, (cid:49), Swindale, (cid:40) and (cid:41)ilinsky, P (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Household Food Insecurity (cid:40)ccess 
Scale  (cid:15)HFI(cid:40)S(cid:16)  for  Measurement  of  Food  (cid:40)ccess.  Indicator  Guide.  (cid:61)ersion  (cid:26). 
FANTA. Washington DC.
Committee on World Food Security (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16), (cid:61)oluntary guidelines to support the 
progressive realization of the right to adequate food in the context of national food 
security. Rome.
IFE Core Group (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Operational Guidance on Infant and (cid:64)oung Child Feeding 
in Emergencies. www.ennonline.net/ife
Inter-(cid:40)gency  Network  for  Education  in  Emergencies  (cid:15)INEE(cid:16)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16),  Minimum 
Standards for Education in Emergencies, Chronic Crises and Early Reconstruction 
(includes School Feeding in Emergencies). Geneva.
International Labour Of(cid:196)ce (cid:15)ILO(cid:16) (cid:15)197(cid:26)(cid:16), Minimum (cid:40)ge Convention No. 1(cid:26)(cid:31).  
www.ilo.org/ilolex/english/convdisp1.htm
LEGS (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards (cid:15)LEGS(cid:16). Practical 
(cid:40)ction Publishing, (cid:60)(cid:50). www.livestock-emergency.net(cid:22)user(cid:196)les(cid:22)(cid:196)le(cid:22)legs.pdf
Pejic,  (cid:49)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16),  The  Right  to  Food  in  Situations  of  (cid:40)rmed  Con(cid:197)ict:  The  Legal 
Framework.  International  Review  of  the  Red  Cross,  vol.  (cid:31)(cid:26),  no.  (cid:31)(cid:27)(cid:27),  p.  1(cid:23)97. 
Geneva. www.icrc.org.
SMART  (Standardised  Monitoring  and  Assessments  of  Relief  and  Transition) 
Guidelines: SMART methodology version.

231

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Swindale,  (cid:40)  and  (cid:41)ilinsky,  P  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16),  Household  (cid:43)ietary  (cid:43)iversity  Score  (cid:15)H(cid:43)(cid:43)S(cid:16) 
for Measurement of Household Food (cid:40)ccess: Indicator Guide. (cid:61)ersion (cid:25). F(cid:40)NT(cid:40). 
Washington DC. 
The Right to (cid:40)de(cid:88)uate Food (cid:15)(cid:40)rticle 11: 1(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:22)99. E(cid:22)C 1(cid:25)(cid:22)1999(cid:22)(cid:28), CESCR General 
Comment 12. United National Economic and Social Council (1999). www.unhchr.
ch
(cid:60)NHCR,  World  Food  Programme  (cid:15)WFP(cid:16),  (cid:60)niversity  College  London  and  I(cid:40)SC 
Nutrition Cluster (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Nut(cid:61)al (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29) version (cid:25).(cid:25). 
www.nutval.net(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:22)download-page.html
WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Food (cid:43)istribution Guidelines. Rome.
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Child  Growth  Standards  and  the  identi(cid:196)cation  of  severe  acute 
malnutrition in infants and children.
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Growth reference for school-aged children and adolescents. 
www.who.int/growthref/en/
WHO (cid:15)19(cid:31)1(cid:16), The International Code of Marketing of (cid:41)reast-Milk Substitutes. 
The full code and subsequent relevant World Health Assembly resolutions: 
www.ibfan.org

Further reading

Assessment references

Initial assessment
I(cid:40)SC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Multi-sectoral  Initial  Rapid  (cid:40)ssessment  (cid:15)IR(cid:40)(cid:16)  Tool.  Global  Health, 
Nutrition and WASH Clusters.

Food security assessment
C(cid:40)RE  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16),  Household  Livelihood  Security  (cid:40)ssessments:  (cid:40)  Toolkit  for  
Practitioners. USA.
F(cid:40)NT(cid:40)-(cid:25) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), (cid:40)lternative Sampling (cid:43)esigns for Emergency Settings: (cid:40) Guide 
for Survey Planning, (cid:43)ata Collection and (cid:40)nalysis. Washington DC. 
www.fantaproject.org/publications/asg2009.shtml
F(cid:40)O and WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Crop and Food Security (cid:40)ssessment Missions (cid:15)CFS(cid:40)M(cid:16) 
Guidelines. Rome.
Save  the  Children  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  The  Household  Economy  (cid:40)pproach:  (cid:40)  guide  for 
programme planners and policy-makers. London.

232

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Emergency Food Security (cid:40)ssessment Handbook (cid:15)EFS(cid:40)(cid:16) (cid:182) second 
edition. Rome.
WFP  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Comprehensive  Food  Security  and  (cid:61)ulnerability  (cid:40)nalysis  (cid:15)CFS(cid:61)(cid:40)(cid:16) 
Guidelines. Rome.

Seed security assessment
Longley,  C  et  al  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16),  (cid:43)o  Farmers  Need  Relief  Seed(cid:38)  (cid:40)  Methodology  for 
(cid:40)ssessing Seed Systems. (cid:43)isasters, (cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:28).
Sperling,  L  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  When  disaster  strikes:  a  guide  to  assessing  seed  system 
security. International Center for Tropical (cid:40)griculture. Cali, Colombia.

Livelihood assessment
(cid:49)aspers, S and Shoham, (cid:49) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16), (cid:40) Critical Review of (cid:40)pproaches to (cid:40)ssessing and 
Monitoring Livelihoods in Situations of Chronic Con(cid:197)ict and Political Instability. O(cid:43)I. 
London.
I(cid:40)SC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Matrix  on  (cid:40)gency  Roles  and  Responsibilities  for  Ensuring  a 
Coordinated, Multi-Sectoral Fuel Strategy in Humanitarian Settings. (cid:61)ersion 1.1. 
Task Force on Safe Access to Firewood and Alternative Energy in Humanitarian 
Settings.

Markets
C(cid:40)RE  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Cash,  Local  Purchase,  and(cid:22)or  Imported  Food  (cid:40)id(cid:38):  Market 
Information and Food Insecurity Response Analysis.
Mike,  (cid:40)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Emergency  Market  Mapping  and  (cid:40)nalysis  (cid:15)EMM(cid:40)(cid:16)  toolkit.  
Practical action, Oxfam G(cid:41).

Food consumption
Food  and  Nutrition  Technical  (cid:40)ssistance  Project  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16),  Household  (cid:43)ietary 
Diversity Score (HDDS).
WFP  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Food  Consumption  Analysis:  Calculation  and  Use  of  the  Food 
Consumption Score in Food Security Analysis. Technical Guidance Sheet.Rome.

Participatory methodologies
(cid:40)ction(cid:40)id (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16), Participatory (cid:61)ulnerability (cid:40)nalysis. London.
C(cid:40)RE (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Climate (cid:61)ulnerability and Capacity (cid:40)nalysis handbook.

233

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

IFRC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), How to do a (cid:61)ulnerability and Capacity (cid:40)ssessment (cid:15)(cid:61)C(cid:40)(cid:16), a step-
by-step guide for Red Cross and Red Crescent Staff and (cid:61)olunteers. Geneva.
Tearfund  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Climate  change  and  Environmental  (cid:43)egradation  Risk  and 
Adaptation assessment CEDRA.

Nutrition and food security information systems
Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS NET): www.fews.net
Food  Insecurity  and  (cid:61)ulnerability  Information  and  Mapping  Systems  (cid:15)FI(cid:61)IMS(cid:16): 
www.(cid:196)vims.net(cid:22)index.jsp
Integrated  Food  Security  Phase  Classi(cid:196)cation  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Technical  Manual. 
(cid:61)ersion 1.1.
Global  Information  and  Early  Warning  System  on  Food  and  (cid:40)griculture,  F(cid:40)O: 
www.fao.org
Shoham, (cid:49), Watson, F and (cid:43)olan, C, The use of nutrition indicators in surveillance 
systems, Technical paper (cid:25). O(cid:43)I. London.

Anthropometric assessment
Centers for (cid:43)isease Control and Prevention (cid:15)C(cid:43)C(cid:16) and WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), (cid:40) Manual: 
Measuring and Interpreting Malnutrition and Mortality. Rome.
Collins,  S,  (cid:43)uf(cid:196)eld,  (cid:40)  and  Myatt,  M  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16),  Adults:  Assessment  of  Nutritional 
Status in Emergency-Affected Populations. Geneva.
(cid:60)N (cid:40)CC Sub Committee on Nutrition (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16), (cid:40)ssessment of (cid:40)dult (cid:60)ndernutrition 
in  Emergencies.  Report  of  an  SCN  working  group  on  emergencies  special 
meeting in SCN News, (cid:25)(cid:25), pp(cid:27)9(cid:182)(cid:28)1. Geneva.
Save the Children (cid:60)(cid:50) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16), Emergency nutrition assessment, and guidance for 
(cid:196)eld workers. London
(cid:64)oung,  H  and  (cid:49)aspars,  S  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16),  The  meaning  and  measurement  of  acute 
malnutrition in emergencies. A primer for decision makers. London.

Micronutrient assessment
Gorstein, (cid:49) et al (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Indicators and methods for cross sectional surveys of 
vitamin and mineral status of populations.
Seal,  (cid:40)  and  Prudhon,  C  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  (cid:40)ssessing  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies  in 
emergencies: Current practice and future directions. Geneva

234

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

IYCF assessment
C(cid:40)RE  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Infant  and  young  child  feeding  practices.  Collecting  and  (cid:60)sing 
Data: A Step-by-Step Guide. www.ennonline.net/resources 

Infant and young child feeding
IFE  Core  Group  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Protecting  infants  in  emergencies,  Information  for  the 
media. www.ennonline.net/ife
IFE Core Group and collaborators (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), IFE Module 1: Orientation package on 
IFE. www.ennonline.net/ife
IFE  Core  Group  and  collaborators  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Module  (cid:25)  on  Infant  Feeding  in 
Emergencies for health and nutrition workers in emergency situations. 
www.ennonline.net/ife
(cid:60)NICEF  and  WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16),  Global  Strategy  for  infant  and  young  child  feeding. 
Geneva.
(cid:60)NHCR (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Guidance on Infant Feeding and HI(cid:61) in the Context of Refugees 
and Displaced Populations. www.ennonline.net/ife
(cid:60)S(cid:40)I(cid:43),  (cid:40)E(cid:43),  F(cid:40)NT(cid:40),  (cid:60)niversity  of  California  (cid:43)(cid:40)(cid:61)IS,  International  Food  Policy 
Research  Institute  (cid:15)IFPRI(cid:16),  (cid:60)NICEF  and  WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Indicators  for  assessing 
infant and young child feeding practices. Washington DC.
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), HI(cid:61) and infant feeding. Principles and recommendationsfor infant 
feeding inthe context of HI(cid:61) and a summary of evidence. Geneva.
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16),  Guiding  Principles  for  feeding  infants  and  young  children  during 
emergencies. Geneva.

Food security interventions

General
(cid:41)arrett, C and Maxwell, (cid:43) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), Food Aid After Fifty Years: Recasting Its Role. 
London.
I(cid:40)SC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), Guidelines for Gender-based (cid:61)iolence Interventions in Humanitarian 
Settings  (cid:182)  Focusing  on  Prevention  of  and  Response  to  Sexual  (cid:61)iolence  in 
Emergencies, Chapters 1(cid:182)(cid:27), (cid:40)ction Sheet (cid:29).1 Food Security and Nutrition.
Maxwell,  (cid:43)  et  al  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Emergency  food  security  interventions.  O(cid:43)I,  Good 
Practice Review (cid:10)1(cid:23). Relief and Rehabilitation Network, O(cid:43)I. London.
(cid:60)NHCR,  (cid:60)NICEF,  WFP  and  WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16),  Food  and  Nutrition  Needs  in 
Emergencies. Geneva.

235

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Targeting and food distribution
(cid:49)aspars,  S  and  (cid:64)oung,  H  (cid:15)199(cid:28)(cid:16),  General  Food  (cid:43)istribution  in  Emergencies: 
from Nutritional Needs to Political Priorities. Good Practice Review (cid:26). Relief and 
Rehabilitation Network, O(cid:43)I. London.
(cid:60)NHCR (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16), (cid:60)NHCR Handbook for Registration. Geneva.
WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), School Feeding (cid:56)uality Standards. Rome.
WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), Food (cid:40)ssistance in the context of HI(cid:61): Ration (cid:43)esign Guide. Rome.
WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Targeting in Emergencies. Rome.

Supply chain management and food quality and safety
C(cid:40)RE, Food Resource Management handbook.
Logistics Cluster (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), Logistics Operational Guide. WFP. Rome.
(cid:60)nited Nations Humanitarian Response (cid:43)epot (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), Catalogue and Standard 
Operating Procedures. www.unhrd.org
WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), Food (cid:56)uality Control: http://foodquality.wfp.org
WFP  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16),  Food  Storage  Manual.  Natural  Resources  Institute  and  WFP. 
Chatham, (cid:60)(cid:50) and Rome.
World (cid:61)ision International, World (cid:61)ision Food Resource Manual. Second edition.
World (cid:61)ision International, Food Monitors Manual.

Cash and vouchers interventions
(cid:40)ction contre la faim (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Implementing Cash-(cid:41)ased Interventions. (cid:40) guide for 
aid workers. Paris.
(cid:40)dams,  L  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Learnings  from  cash  responses  to  the  tsunami:  Final  report, 
HPG background paper.
Cash Learning Partnership (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), (cid:43)elivering Money: Cash Transfer Mechanisms 
in Emergencies. Save the Children (cid:60)(cid:50), Oxfam G(cid:41) and (cid:41)ritish Red Cross, with 
support from ECHO. London.
Creti,  P  and  (cid:49)aspars,  S  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16),  Cash  Transfer  Programming  in  Emergencies, 
Oxfam GB. London.
Harvey, P (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), Cash and (cid:61)ouchers in Emergencies, HPG background paper. 
ODI. London.

236

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   F o o d   S e c u r i t y   a n d   N u t r i t i o n

Seed interventions
Catholic  Relief  Services  (cid:15)CRS(cid:16)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16),  Seed  (cid:61)ouchers  and  Fairs:  (cid:40)  Manual  for 
Seed-(cid:41)ased (cid:40)gricultural Recovery in (cid:40)frica. CRS, incollaboration with O(cid:43)I and 
the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics.
Sperling,  L  and  Remington,  T,  with  Haugen  (cid:49)M  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16),  Seed  (cid:40)id  for  Seed 
Security:  (cid:40)dvice  for  Practitioners,  Practice  (cid:41)riefs  1-1(cid:23).  International  Centre  for 
Tropical Agriculture and CRS. Rome.

General emergency nutrition manuals
I(cid:40)SC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), (cid:40) toolkit for addressing nutrition in emergency situations.
I(cid:40)SC  Nutrition  Cluster(cid:187)s  Capacity  (cid:43)evelopment  Working  Group 
Harmonised Training Package (HTP).
Prudhon,  C  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16),  (cid:40)ssessment  and  Treatment  of  Malnutrition  in  Emergency 
Situations. Paris.
(cid:60)NHCR and WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Guidelines for Selective Feeding the Management of 
Malnutrition in Emergencies.
(cid:60)NHCR,  (cid:60)NICEF,  WFP  and  WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16),  Food  and  Nutrition  Needs  in 
Emergencies. Geneva.
WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16), Food and Nutrition Handbook. Rome.
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16), The Management of Nutrition in Major Emergencies. Geneva.

(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), 

Vulnerable people
F(cid:40)NT(cid:40) and WFP (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Food (cid:40)ssistance Programming in the Context of HI(cid:61).
F(cid:40)O and WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16), Living Well with HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S. (cid:40) Manual on Nutritional 
Care and Support for People Living with HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S.
Help(cid:40)ge International (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16), (cid:40)ddressing the Nutritional Needs of Older People in 
Emergency Situations in Africa: Ideas for Action. Nairobi. 
www.helpage.org/publications
Help(cid:40)ge and (cid:60)NHCR (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Older people in disasters and humanitarian crisis.
I(cid:40)SC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Women, Girls, (cid:41)oys and Men: (cid:43)ifferent Needs (cid:182) E(cid:88)ual Opportunities.
Winstock, (cid:40) (cid:15)199(cid:27)(cid:16), The Practical Management of Eating and (cid:43)rinking (cid:43)if(cid:196)culties 
in Children. Winslow Press. (cid:41)icester, (cid:60)(cid:50).

237

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e
H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Management of acute malnutrition
ENN, CIH(cid:43) and (cid:40)CF (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), M(cid:40)MI Report. Technical Review: Current evidence, 
policies, practices (cid:13) programme outcomes.
ENN, IFE Core Group and collaborators (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Integration of I(cid:64)CF support into 
CMAM. www.ennonline.net/resources
F(cid:40)NT(cid:40)-(cid:25)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Training  guide  for  community  based  management  of  acute 
malnutrition.
Navarro-Colorado,  C,  Mason,  F  and  Shoham,  (cid:49)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Measuring  the 
effectiveness of SFP in emergencies.
Navarro-Colorado,  C  and  Shoham,  (cid:49)  (cid:15)forthcoming(cid:16),  Supplementary  feeding 
minimum reporting package.
(cid:61)(cid:40)LI(cid:43) International (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Community (cid:41)ased Therapeutic Care (cid:15)CTC(cid:16): (cid:40) Field 
Manual.
WHO (cid:15)1999(cid:16), Management of Severe Malnutrition: (cid:40) Manual for Physicians and 
Other Senior Health Workers. Geneva.
WHO,  WFP,  (cid:60)NSCN  and  (cid:60)NICEF  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Community-(cid:41)ased  Management 
of Severe (cid:40)cute Malnutrition. (cid:40) (cid:49)oint Statement by the WHO, WFP, the (cid:60)nited 
Nations System Standing Committee on Nutrition and UNICEF.

Micronutrient deﬁciencies
Seal,  (cid:40)  and  Prudhon,  C  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  (cid:40)ssessing  micronutrient  de(cid:196)ciencies  in 
emergencies: Current practice and future directions.
(cid:60)NICEF, (cid:60)N(cid:60) and WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16), Iron (cid:43)e(cid:196)ciency (cid:40)naemia: (cid:40)ssessment, Prevention 
and Control. A Guide for Programme Managers. Geneva.
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16),  Pellagra  and  Its  Prevention  and  Control  in  Major  Emergencies. 
Geneva.
WHO  (cid:15)1999(cid:16),  Scurvy  and  Its  Prevention  and  Control  in  Major  Emergencies. 
Geneva.
WHO  (cid:15)1999(cid:16),Thiamine  (cid:43)e(cid:196)ciency  (cid:40)nd  Its  Prevention  (cid:40)nd  Control  In  Major 
Emergencies. Geneva.
WHO (cid:15)1997(cid:16), (cid:61)itamin (cid:40) Supplements: (cid:40) Guide to Their (cid:60)se in the Treatment and 
Prevention of (cid:61)itamin (cid:40) (cid:43)e(cid:196)ciency and (cid:63)eropthalmia. Second Edition. Geneva.
WHO and (cid:60)NICEF (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Guiding principles for the use of multiple vitamin and 
mineral preparations in emergencies.

238

Minimum Standards  
in Shelter,  
Settlement and  
Non-Food Items

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

How to use this chapter

This chapter is divided into two main sections:

Shelter and settlement
Non-food items: clothing, bedding and household items

Both sections provide general standards for use in any of several response scenarios for displaced 
and non-displaced populations, including temporary or transitional individual household shelter on 
original sites, or the return to repaired dwellings; temporary accommodation with host families; 
and/or  temporary  communal  settlement  comprising  planned  or  self-settled  camps,  collective 
centres, transit or return centres.

The Protection Principles and Core Standards must be used consistently with this chapter. 

Although primarily intended to inform humanitarian response to a disaster, the minimum standards 
may also be considered during disaster preparedness and the transition to recovery and recon-
struction activities.

Each section contains the following:

  Minimum standards: These are qualitative in nature and specify the minimum levels to be 

attained in humanitarian response regarding the provision of shelter.

 

 

 

Key actions: These are suggested activities and inputs to help meet the standards.

Key indicators: These are ‘signals’ that show whether a standard has been attained. They 
provide a way of measuring and communicating the processes and results of key actions; they 
relate to the minimum standard, not to the key action.

Guidance notes: These include speciﬁc points to consider when applying the minimum stan-
dards, key actions and key indicators in different situations. They provide guidance on tackling 
practical difﬁculties, benchmarks or advice on priority issues. They may also include critical 
issues relating to the standards, actions or indicators, and describe dilemmas, controversies 
or gaps in current knowledge.

If required key actions and indicators cannot be met, the resulting adverse implications on the 
affected population should be appraised and appropriate mitigating actions taken.

A needs assessment checklist is provided to inform the application of the minimum standards in 
both  deﬁning  and  monitoring  response  activities,  and  a  list  of  references  and  further  reading, 
including a selection of practical ‘how to’ guidance resources, is also included.

240

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

Contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243

1. Shelter and settlement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249

2. Non-food items: clothing, bedding and household items . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .268

Appendix 1: Shelter, settlement and non-food items assessment checklist . . . . 278

References and further reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .284

241

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Humanitarian 

Charter

Protection 
Principles

Core  

Standards

Shelter, settlement and non-food items

Shelter and settlement

Non-food items

Standard 1
Strategic planning

Standard 2
Settlement planning

Standard 3
Covered living space

Standard 4
Construction

Standard 1
Individual, general 
household and shelter 
support items 

Standard 2
Clothing and bedding

Standard 3
Cooking and 
eating utensils

Standard 4
Stoves, fuel and lighting

Standard 5
Environmental impact

Standard 5
Tools and (cid:196)xings

Appendix 1: Shelter, settlement and non-food items assessment checklist

References and further reading

242

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

Introduction
Links to the Humanitarian Charter and international law

The minimum standards for shelter, settlement and non-food items are a practical 
expression of the shared beliefs and commitments of humanitarian agencies and 
the common principles, rights and duties governing humanitarian action that are 
set out in the Humanitarian Charter. Founded on the principle of humanity, and 
re(cid:197)ected in international law, these principles include the right to life with dignity, 
the right to protection and security and the right to receive humanitarian assis-
tance on the basis of need. A list of key legal and policy docu ments that inform 
the Humanitarian Charter is available for reference in (cid:40)nnex 1 (cid:15)see page (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:16), with 
explanatory comments for humanitarian workers. In humanitarian action, shelter, 
settlement and associated non-food items are familiar terms that fall within the 
scope of the right to ade(cid:88)uate housing, which is enshrined in human rights law.

Everyone has the right to adequate housing. This right is recognised in key inter-
national legal instruments (see References and further reading: International legal 
instruments(cid:16).  This  includes  the  right  to  live  in  security,  peace  and  dignity,  with 
security of tenure, as well as protection from forced eviction and the right to resti-
tution. These instruments de(cid:196)ne ade(cid:88)uate housing as ensuring:

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

suf(cid:196)cient space and protection from cold, damp, heat, rain, wind or other 
threats to health, including structural ha(cid:97)ards and disease vectors

the availability of services, facilities, materials and infrastructure

affordability, habitability, accessibility, location and cultural appropriateness

sustainable  access  to  natural  and  common  resources;  safe  drinking  water; 
energy  for  cooking,  heating  and  lighting;  sanitation  and  washing  facilities; 
means of food storage; refuse disposal; site drainage; and emergency services

the appropriate siting of settlements and housing to provide safe access to 
healthcare services, schools, childcare centres and other social facilities and 
to livelihood opportunities

that building materials and policies relating to housing construction appropri-
ately enable the expression of cultural identity and diversity of housing.

243

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The minimum standards in this chapter are not a complete expression of the right 
to ade(cid:88)uate housing as de(cid:196)ned by the relevant international legal instruments. 
Rather, the minimum standards re(cid:197)ect the core content of the right to adequate 
housing and contribute to the progressive realisation of this right.

The importance of shelter, settlement and  
non-food items in disasters

Shelter is a critical determinant for survival in the initial stages of a disaster. Beyond 
survival, shelter is necessary to provide security, personal safety and protection 
from  the  climate  and  to  promote  resistance  to  ill  health  and  disease.  It  is  also 
important for human dignity, to sustain family and community life and to enable 
affected populations to recover from the impact of disaster. Shelter and associ-
ated  settlement  and  non-food  item  responses  should  support  existing  coping 
strategies and promote self-suf(cid:196)ciency and self-management by those affected 
by the disaster. Local skills and resources should be maximised where this does 
not result in adverse effects on the affected population or local economy. Any 
response should take into account known disaster risks and minimise the long-
term adverse impact on the natural environment, while maximising opportunities 
for the affected population to maintain or establish livelihood support activities.

Thermal comfort, protection from the effects of the climate and personal safety 
and dignity are achieved by meeting a combination of needs at the level of the 
individuals themselves, the covered space they inhabit and the location in which 
their covered area is situated. Similarly, meeting these needs re(cid:88)uires an appro-
priate  combination  of  the  means  to  prepare,  cook  and  eat  food;  clothing  and 
bedding; an ade(cid:88)uate covered area or shelter; a means of space heating and 
ventilation as re(cid:88)uired; and access to essential services.

The  shelter,  settlement  and  non-food  item  needs  of  populations  affected  by  a 
disaster are determined by the type and scale of the disaster and the extent to 
which  the  population  is  displaced.  The  response  will  also  be  informed  by  the 
ability  and  desire  of  displaced  populations  to  return  to  the  site  of  their  original 
dwelling and to start the recovery process:  where they are unable or unwilling 
to return, they will re(cid:88)uire temporary or transitional shelter and settlement solu-
tions (see the diagram opposite). The local context of the disaster will inform the 
response, including whether the affected area is rural or urban; the local climatic 
and environmental conditions; the political and security situation; and the ability of 
the affected population to contribute to meeting their shelter needs. 

244

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

Shelter and settlement options and response scenarios

PRE-DISASTER  

SETTLED POPULATION

Temporary or permanent shelter

Settlement typologies

House 

owner–occupier

Apartment 

owner–occupier

House tenant

Apartment tenant

Land tenant

Occupancy with 
no legal status

Disaster

POST-DISASTER NON-

DISPLACED POPULATION

Temporary or transitional shelter; 

repair or reconstruction

POST-DISASTER DISPLACED 

POPULATION

Temporary or transitional shelter

SETTLEMENT TYPOLOGIES

SETTLEMENT TYPOLOGIES

House 

owner–occupier

Apartment 

owner–occupier

Dispersed self-
settlement with 
no legal status

Short-term 

land, house or 
apartment tenant

House
tenant

Land
tenant

Apartment tenant

Hosting by 

families

Collective 
centres

Occupancy with 
no legal status

Self-settled, 
unplanned 

camps

Planned and 

managed
camps

DURABLE SOLUTIONS

Reconstruction
Resettlement
Reintegration

245

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

In  extreme  weather  conditions,  where  shelter  may  be  critical  to  survival  or,  as 
a  result  of  displacement,  the  affected  population  may  be  unable  to  construct 
appropriate shelter, rapidly deployable shelter solutions, such as tents or similar, 
will be required or temporary accommodation provided in existing public build-
ings.  (cid:43)isplaced  populations  may  arrange  shelter  with  host  families,  settle  as 
individual households or in groups of households within existing settlements or 
may need to be temporarily accommodated in planned and managed camps or 
collective centres.

Affected  populations  should  be  supported  where  possible  to  repair  or  adapt 
existing dwellings or build new structures. Assistance can include the provision of 
appropriate construction materials, tools and (cid:196)xings, cash or vouchers, technical 
guidance  and  training  or  a  combination  of  these.  Support  or  technical  assis-
tance should be provided to affected populations who do not have the capacity 
or expertise to undertake construction activities. The rights and needs of those 
who are secondarily affected by the disaster, such as neighbouring populations 
hosting those displaced by the disaster, must also be considered. Where public 
buildings, particularly schools, have been used as temporary communal accom-
modation, the planned and managed safe relocation of the sheltered population 
should be undertaken as soon as possible to allow for normal activities to resume.

Any  response  should  be  informed  by  the  steps  taken  by  the  affected  popula-
tion to provide temporary or permanent shelter using their own capacities and 
resources. Shelter responses should enable affected populations to incremen-
tally  upgrade  and/or  make  the  transition  from  emergency  to  durable  housing 
solutions.

The repair of damaged public buildings or the provision of temporary structures 
to serve as schools, healthcare centres and other communal facilities may also be 
required. The sheltering of livelihood assets such as livestock may be an essential 
complement to the provision of household shelter for some affected populations. 
The response should be informed by existing shelter and settlement risks and 
vulnerabilities  regarding  location,  planning,  design  and  construction,  including 
those  made  worse  by  the  disaster  or  due  to  the  impact  of  climate  change. 
Consideration  of  the  environmental  impact  of  settlement  solutions  and  shelter 
construction is also critical to minimising the long-term impact of a disaster.

(cid:41)etter  shelter,  settlement  and  non-food  items  disaster  response  is  achieved 
through better preparedness. Such preparedness is the result of the capaci-
ties,  relationships  and  knowledge  developed  by  governments,  humanitarian 
agencies,  local  civil  society  organisations,  communities  and  individuals  to 
anticipate and respond effectively to the impact of likely, imminent or current 
hazards. Preparedness is informed by an analysis of risks and the use of early 
warning systems.

246

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

Links to other chapters

Many of the standards in the other chapters are relevant to this chapter. Progress in 
achieving standards in one area often in(cid:197)uences and sometimes even determines 
progress  in  other  areas.  For  an  intervention  to  be  effective,  close  coordination 
and collaboration is re(cid:88)uired with other sectors. For example, the complemen-
tary provision of an adequate water supply and sanitation facilities in areas where 
shelter assistance is being provided is necessary to ensure the health and dignity 
of the affected population. Similarly, the provision of ade(cid:88)uate shelter contributes 
to  the  health  and  well-being  of  displaced  populations,  while  essential  cooking 
and eating utensils and fuel for cooking are required to enable food assistance 
to be utilised and nutritional needs met. Coordination with local authorities, other 
responding agencies and community-based and representative organisations is 
also necessary to ensure that needs are met, that efforts are not duplicated and 
that the (cid:88)uality of shelter, settlement and non-food item interventions is optimised.

Links to the Protection Principles and Core Standards

In  order  to  meet  the  standards  of  this  Handbook,  all  humanitarian  agencies 
should be guided by the Protection Principles, even if they do not have a distinct 
protection mandate. The Principles are not ‘absolute’: circumstances may limit 
the extent to which agencies are able to ful(cid:196)l them. Nevertheless, the Principles 
re(cid:197)ect universal humanitarian concerns which should guide action at all times. 

The process by which an intervention is developed and implemented is critical 
to its effectiveness. The six core standards cover people-centred humanitarian 
response;  coordination  and  collaboration;  assessment;  design  and  response; 
performance,  transparency  and  learning;  and  aid  worker  performance.  They 
provide a single reference point for approaches that support all other standards in 
the  Handbook.  Each  technical  chapter,  therefore,  re(cid:88)uires  the  companion  use 
of the Core Standards to help attain its own standards. In particular, to ensure 
the  appropriateness  and  (cid:88)uality  of  any  response,  the  participation  of  disaster-
affected people – including the groups and individuals most frequently at risk in 
disasters – should be maximised.

Vulnerabilities and capacities of disaster-affected 
populations

This  section  is  designed  to  be  read  in  conjunction  with,  and  to  reinforce,  
the Core Standards. 

247

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

It is important to understand that to be young or old, a woman or a person with a 
disability or HI(cid:61) does not, of itself, make a person vulnerable or at increased risk. 
Rather, it is the interplay of factors that does so: for example, someone who is 
over 7(cid:23) years of age, lives alone and has poor health is likely to be more vulnerable 
than someone of a similar age and health status living within an extended family 
and with suf(cid:196)cient income. Similarly, a (cid:26)-year-old girl is much more vulnerable if 
she is unaccompanied than if she were living in the care of responsible parents.

(cid:40)s  the  shelter,  settlement  and  non-food  item  standards  and  (cid:50)ey  actions  are 
implemented, a vulnerability and capacity analysis helps to ensure that a disaster 
response effort supports those who have a right to assistance in a non-discrim-
inatory manner and who need it most. This requires a thorough understanding 
of the local context and of how a particular crisis impacts on particular groups 
of people in different ways due to their pre-existing vulnerabilities (e.g. being very 
poor or discriminated against(cid:16), their exposure to various protection threats (cid:15)e.g. 
gender-based violence including sexual exploitation(cid:16), disease incidence or preva-
lence  (cid:15)e.g.  HI(cid:61)  or  tuberculosis(cid:16)  and  possibilities  of  epidemics  (cid:15)e.g.  measles  or 
cholera(cid:16). (cid:43)isasters can make pre-existing ine(cid:88)ualities worse. However, support 
for  people(cid:187)s  coping  strategies,  resilience  and  recovery  capacities  is  essential. 
Their  knowledge,  skills  and  strategies  need  to  be  supported  and  their  access 
to  social,  legal,  (cid:196)nancial  and  psychosocial  support  advocated  for.  The  various 
physical, cultural, economic and social barriers they may face in accessing these 
services in an equitable manner also need to be addressed.

The following points highlight some of the key areas that will ensure that the rights 
and capacities of all vulnerable people are considered:

 » Optimise people(cid:187)s participation, ensuring that all representative groups are 
included,  especially  those  who  are  less  visible  (cid:15)e.g.  individuals  who  have 
communication or mobility dif(cid:196)culties, those living in institutions, stigmatised 
youth and other under- or unrepresented groups).

 » Disaggregate data by sex and age (0–80+ years) during assessment – this is 
an important element in ensuring that the sector or area adequately considers 
the diversity of populations.

 »

Ensure that the right to information on entitlements is communicated in a way 
that is inclusive and accessible to all members of the community.

248

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

The minimum standards

1. Shelter and settlement

Non-displaced  disaster-affected  populations  should  be  assisted  on  the  site  of 
their  original  homes  with  temporary  or  transitional  household  shelter,  or  with 
resources for the repair or construction of appropriate shelter. Individual house-
hold  shelter  for  such  populations  can  be  temporary  or  permanent,  subject  to 
factors including the extent of the assistance provided, land-use rights or owner-
ship,  the  availability  of  essential  services  and  the  opportunities  for  upgrading 
and expanding the shelter. Displaced populations who are unable to return to 
their  original  homes  often  prefer  to  stay  with  other  family  members  or  people 
with whom they share historical, religious or other ties, and should be assisted 
to do so. When such dispersed settlement is not possible, temporary communal 
settlement can be provided in planned or self-settled camps, along with tempo-
rary or transitional household shelter, or in suitable large public buildings used as 
collective centres.

Shelter and settlement standard 1: Strategic planning

Shelter  and  settlement  strategies  contribute  to  the  security,  safety, 
health  and  well-being  of  both  displaced  and  non-displaced  affected 
populations and promote recovery and reconstruction where possible.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Assess and analyse the shelter and settlement needs of the affected popu-
lation in consultation with the relevant authorities and the population them-
selves (see guidance note 1).

 » Develop  a  shelter  and  settlement  response  plan  (including  early  recovery 
where  possible(cid:16)  in  coordination  with  the  relevant  authorities,  responding 
agencies and the affected population (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

Prioritise  and  support  the  return  of  affected  households  to  their  original 
dwellings or the site of their dwelling where possible (see guidance note 2).

Assist those who are unable or unwilling to return to their original dwellings 
to be hosted by other households or to be accommodated within temporary 
communal settlements (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27)(cid:16).

249

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

 »

 »

 »

Ensure access to non-food items, shelter solutions (cid:15)such as tents or shelter 
kits(cid:16), construction materials, cash, technical assistance or information or a 
combination of these, as re(cid:88)uired (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

Ensure  dwellings  or  settlements  are  located  at  a  safe  distance  from  any 
actual or potential threats and that risks from existing hazards are minimised 
(see guidance note 7).

Ensure that debris resulting from the disaster is removed from key locations 
including the sites of damaged or destroyed homes, temporary communal 
settlements,  essential  public  buildings  and  access  routes  (cid:15)see  guidance 
note 8).

Plan safe access to water and sanitation services, health facilities, schools 
and  places  for  recreation  and  worship,  and  to  land,  markets  or  services 
used for the continuation or development of livelihood support activities (see 
guidance notes 9–10).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Shelter and settlement solutions to meet the essential needs of all the disaster-
affected population are agreed with the population themselves and relevant 
authorities in coordination with all responding agencies (see guidance note 1).

 »

All temporary shelter and settlement solutions are safe and adequate and 
will  remain  so  until  more  durable  solutions  are  achieved  (see  guidance 
notes 2–10).

Guidance notes
1.  Assessment,  consultation  and  coordination:  An  initial  needs  assess-
ment is essential to identify the shelter and settlement needs of the affected 
population, post-disaster risks, vulnerabilities and capacities, opportunities 
to address recovery from the outset and the need for more detailed assess-
ment  including  environmental  impact.  The  disaster-affected  population 
(cid:15)especially  vulnerable  people  with  speci(cid:196)c  needs(cid:16),  along  with  the  relevant 
authorities, should be involved in any such assessment. Existing contingency 
plans should be used to inform response activities, in coordination with the 
relevant authorities, humanitarian and other agencies and the affected popu-
lation using agreed coordination mechanisms. The availability of resources, 
the local context (cid:15)including seasonal weather patterns(cid:16), security and access 
to  existing  or  new  sites  and  land  will  inform  response  planning  (see  Core 
Standards 1(cid:182)(cid:28) on pages (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:31), Non-food items standards 1(cid:182)(cid:28) on pages 
(cid:25)(cid:29)9(cid:182)(cid:25)7(cid:29) and (cid:40)ppendix 1: Shelter, settlement and non-food items assess-
ment checklist).

250

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

2.  Return:  The  opportunity  to  return  to  their  own  land  and  dwellings  is  a 
major  goal  for  most  disaster-affected  populations.  The  repair  of  dwellings 
or  the  upgrading  of  shelter  solutions  determined  by  the  population  them-
selves supports communal coping strategies, retains established settlement 
patterns and enables the use of existing infrastructure (see Core Standard 1 
on page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16). Return may be delayed or prevented and so re(cid:88)uire a period of 
temporary settlement elsewhere. Issues affecting return include the contin-
uation  of  the  disaster,  such  as  ongoing  (cid:197)ooding,  landslides  or  earth(cid:88)uake 
aftershocks, and security concerns, such as occupation of property or land 
and  the  need  for  restitution,  continuing  violent  con(cid:197)ict,  ethnic  or  religious 
tension,  fear  of  persecution  or  landmines  and  unexploded  ordnance.  The 
reconstruction of schools is also important to enable displaced populations 
to return. Return by female-headed households, those widowed or orphaned 
by the disaster or persons with disabilities may be inhibited by inadequate 
or  discriminatory  land  and  property  legislation  or  customary  procedures. 
Displaced populations who may not have the ability to undertake reconstruc-
tion activities may also be discouraged or prevented from returning.

3.  Hosting  by  families  and  communities:  Displaced  populations  who  are 
unable to return to their original homes often prefer to stay with other family 
members or people with whom they share historical, religious or other ties 
(cid:15)see Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16). (cid:40)ssistance for such hosting may include 
support to expand or adapt an existing host family shelter and facilities to 
accommodate  the  displaced  household,  or  the  provision  of  an  additional 
separate shelter adjacent to the host family. The resulting increase in popula-
tion density should be assessed and the demand on social facilities, infra-
structure provision and natural resources should be evaluated and mitigated.

4.  Temporary  communal  settlement:  Although  they  should  not  become  a 
default response, temporary planned camps can be used to accommodate 
affected populations who are unable or unwilling to return to the site of their 
original  dwelling  and  for  whom  hosting  by  other  families  is  not  an  option. 
Such settlement solutions may be required in areas where security threats 
increase the risk to isolated populations or where access to essential services 
and  resources  such  as  water,  food  and  locally  sourced  building  materials 
is  limited.  Existing  buildings  used  as  collective  centres  can  provide  rapid 
temporary  protection  from  the  climate.  Buildings  used  for  such  purposes 
may re(cid:88)uire adaptation or upgrading, for example the provision of internal 
subdivisions  and  ramps  for  those  with  mobility  dif(cid:196)culties.  In  many  coun-
tries, the use of pre-identi(cid:196)ed buildings for collective centres is the estab-
lished response to known types of disaster, with associated management 
and  service  provision  responsibilities.  Although  school  buildings  are  often 
used to accommodate disaster-affected populations, alternative structures 

251

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

should be identi(cid:196)ed to enable schooling to continue. The planning of tempo-
rary communal settlements should consider the implications on the personal 
safety, privacy and dignity of occupants and access to essential facilities. It 
is necessary to ensure that temporary communal settlements do not them-
selves  become  targets  for  attack,  pose  a  security  risk  to  the  surrounding 
population or result in unsustainable demands on the surrounding natural 
environment.

5.  Types of shelter assistance: Combinations of different types of assistance 
may be required to meet the shelter needs of affected populations. Basic 
assistance  can  include  personal  items,  such  as  clothing  and  bedding,  or 
general household items, such as stoves and fuel. Shelter support items can 
include tents, plastic sheeting and toolkits, building materials and temporary 
or transitional shelters using materials that can be reused as part of perma-
nent  shelters.  Manual  or  specialist  labour,  either  voluntary  or  contracted, 
may also be re(cid:88)uired, as well as technical guidance on appropriate building 
techniques. The use of cash or vouchers to promote the use of local supply 
chains and resources should be considered, subject to the functioning of 
the local economy. Cash can also be used to pay for rental accommodation. 
Information or advice distributed through public campaigns or local centres 
on how to access grants, materials or other forms of shelter support can 
complement commodity-based assistance.

6.  Transitional  shelter:  (cid:40)n  approach  rather  than  a  phase  of  response,  the 
provision of transitional shelter responds to the fact that post-disaster shelter 
is  often  undertaken  by  the  affected  population  themselves,  and  this  self-
management should be supported (cid:15)see Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16). Post-
disaster  shelter  solutions  that  can  be  reused  in  part  or  in  whole  in  more 
permanent structures, or relocated from temporary to permanent locations, 
can promote the transition by affected populations to more durable shelter. 
For  non-displaced  populations  on  the  site  of  their  original  homes,  transi-
tional shelter can provide a basic starter home, to be upgraded, expanded 
or replaced over time as resources permit. For displaced populations, tran-
sitional shelter can provide appropriate shelter which can be disassembled 
and reused when the affected populations are able to return to the sites of 
their original homes or are resettled in new locations. Transitional shelter can 
also be provided to affected populations hosted by other households who 
can accommodate the erection of an adjacent or adjoining shelter. Any such 
structures can be removed and reused when the affected populations are 
able to return to their original sites or elsewhere.

7.  Risk,  vulnerability  and  hazard  assessments:  Undertake  and  regu-
larly  review  a  comprehensive  risk  and  vulnerability  assessment  (see  Core 
Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1(cid:16). (cid:40)ctual or potential security threats and the uni(cid:88)ue 

252

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

risks and vulnerabilities due to age, gender, disability, social or economic 
status,  the  dependence  of  affected  populations  on  natural  environmental 
resources, and the relationships between affected populations and any host 
communities should be included in any such assessments (see Protection 
Principle  (cid:26)  on  page  (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:16).  Risks  posed  by  natural  ha(cid:97)ards  such  as  earth-
(cid:88)uakes, volcanic activity, landslides, (cid:197)ooding or high winds should inform 
the planning of shelter and settlement solutions. Settlement locations should 
not be prone to diseases or contamination or have signi(cid:196)cant vector risks. 
Potentially  hazardous  materials  and  goods  can  be  deposited  or  exposed 
following  natural  disasters  such  as  earth(cid:88)uakes,  (cid:197)oods  and  typhoons. 
Mines and unexploded ordnance can be present due to previous or current 
con(cid:197)icts. The stability of building structures in inhabited areas affected by 
the  disaster  should  be  assessed  by  technical  specialists.  For  collective 
centres, the ability of existing building structures to accommodate any addi-
tional loading and the increased risk of the failure of building components 
such as (cid:197)oors, internal dividing walls, roofs, etc., should be assessed.

8.  Debris  removal:  The  removal  of  debris  following  a  natural  disaster  or 
con(cid:197)ict is a priority to enable the provision of shelter and the establishment 
of appropriate settlement solutions. Debris management planning should 
be initiated immediately after the disaster to ensure debris can be recycled 
or  identi(cid:196)ed  for  separation,  collection  and(cid:22)or  treatment  (cid:15)see  Shelter  and 
settlement  standard  (cid:28)  on  page  (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:16).  (cid:50)ey  issues  include  the  presence  of 
corpses  re(cid:88)uiring  identi(cid:196)cation  and  appropriate  handling,  the  retrieval  of 
personal  possessions,  structurally  dangerous  locations  and  ha(cid:97)ardous 
materials  and  ownership  of  salvageable  materials  for  reuse  or  sale.  The 
removal of debris may provide opportunities for cash for work programmes 
and/or require the use of major equipment and expertise to undertake. The 
use, management, ownership and environmental impact of disposal sites 
should be considered.

9.  Schools,  health  facilities  and  community  infrastructure:  Access  to 
essential  services  should  be  ensured,  including  schools,  health  facilities, 
safe play areas and communal meeting areas. Existing or repaired service 
infrastructure should be used, with additional temporary services or facilities 
as required. Where the repair or construction of public buildings is subject 
to the development of new settlement plans or other regulatory processes, 
temporary  structures  may  be  re(cid:88)uired  to  provide  immediate,  short-term 
facilities. Any such service provision using temporary or permanent struc-
tures  should  meet  agreed  standards  (cid:15)see  W(cid:40)SH  standard  1  on  page  (cid:31)9, 
Health systems standard 1 on page 296 and INEE Minimum Standards for 
Education: Preparedness, Response, Recovery(cid:16).

253

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

10.  Livelihood  support:  The  settling  of  disaster-affected  populations  should 
be informed by their pre-disaster economic activities and the opportunities 
within the post-disaster context (see Food security and nutrition assessment 
standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages 1(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:182)1(cid:28)(cid:27) and Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16). Land 
availability and access for cultivation and gra(cid:97)ing, and access to market areas 
and local services for particular economic activities should be considered.

Shelter and settlement standard 2: Settlement planning

The  planning  of  return,  host  or  temporary  communal  settlements 
enables the safe and secure use of accommodation and essential 
services by the affected population.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Identify  and  use  existing  planning  processes  where  possible,  informed  by 
agreed  best  practice,  minimising  settlement  risk  and  vulnerabilities  (cid:15)see 
guidance note 1).

 »

 »

Identify housing, land and property ownership and(cid:22)or use rights for buildings 
or locations (see guidance note 2).

Ensure safe access to all shelters and settlement locations and to essential 
services (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27)(cid:16).

 » Use  existing  settlement  patterns  and  topographical  features  to  minimise 

adverse impact on the natural environment (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

 »

Involve  the  affected  population  in  the  planning  of  temporary  communal 
settlements by family, neighbourhood or village groups as appropriate (cid:15)see 
guidance note 6).

Ensure  suf(cid:196)cient  surface  area  and  ade(cid:88)uate  (cid:196)re  separation  in  temporary 
planned and self-settled camps (see guidance notes 7–8).

 » Minimise vector risks (see guidance note 9).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Through  agreed  planning  processes,  all  shelter-assisted  populations  are 
consulted on and agree to the location of their shelter or covered area and 
access to essential services (see guidance note 1).

 »

All settlement plans demonstrate that risks and vulnerabilities in the use of 
shelters, covered areas and essential services have been identi(cid:196)ed and miti-
gated (see guidance notes 2–9).

254

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

Guidance notes
1.  Planning processes: Local planning practices should be used and informed 
by  the  type  of  disaster  or  crisis,  identi(cid:196)ed  ha(cid:97)ards  and  the  impact  on  the 
affected  population.  Appropriate  measures  to  minimise  settlement  risks 
and vulnerabilities should be used. Existing planning regulations should be 
complied with where required by the relevant authorities and where this does 
not impede the humanitarian imperative of meeting urgent shelter and settle-
ment needs. The longer-term implications of planning decisions, particularly 
regarding sites for temporary communal settlement, should be identi(cid:196)ed.

2.  Housing, land and property ownership, rights and usage: For both non-
displaced  and  displaced  populations,  identify  ownership  of  relevant  land, 
housing or other buildings and the holders of formal or customary use rights. 
Such issues are often controversial, especially where records may not have 
been kept or where con(cid:197)ict may have affected possession. Multi-occupancy 
dwellings  or  buildings  with  mixed  usage  will  involve  common  or  shared 
ownership  or  occupancy  rights.  The  identi(cid:196)cation  of  the  land  or  property 
rights of vulnerable people should be sought and such people supported, in 
particular women, those widowed or orphaned by the disaster, persons with 
disabilities,  tenants,  social  occupancy  rights-holders  and  informal  settlers. 
Clarify  formal,  informal  or  understood  rights  of  ownership  or  inheritance, 
particularly following a disaster in which the holder of the rights or title may 
have died or been displaced. The provision of group tenure or similar to a 
number  of  households  where  no  formal  rights  existed  before  the  disaster 
can assist in the incremental establishment of such rights. The provision of 
shelter assistance may also be perceived or used as legitimising land title 
claims which could inhibit or prevent humanitarian action. The use of land for 
temporary communal settlements should consider existing use rights of the 
land or natural environmental resources by the host or neighbouring commu-
nities (cid:15)see Shelter and settlement standard (cid:28) on page (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:16).

3.  Essential  services  and  facilities:  Disaster-affected  populations  returning 
to  the  site  of  their  original  homes,  being  hosted  or  accommodated  in 
temporary  communal  settlements  all  re(cid:88)uire  safe,  secure  and  e(cid:88)uitable 
access to essential services. These include, as appropriate, water, sanitary 
facilities,  fuel  for  cooking  or  communal  cooking  facilities,  healthcare, 
solid  waste  disposal,  schools,  social  facilities,  places  of  worship,  meeting 
points,  recreational  areas,  including  child-friendly  spaces  and  space  for 
livestock  accommodation  (ensuring  adequate  separation  of  any  such 
livestock  from  residential  spaces(cid:16).  Suf(cid:196)cient  space  should  be  provided  for 
culturally appropriate burials and associated rituals. The use of existing or 
repaired facilities should be maximised where this does not adversely affect 
neighbouring or host communities. Additional facilities or access points to 

255

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

meet the needs of the target population, and in particular vulnerable people, 
should  be  provided.  The  social  structure  and  gender  roles  of  the  affected 
population and the re(cid:88)uirements of vulnerable people should be re(cid:197)ected in 
the service provision, for example ensuring services are within reasonable 
walking distance for individuals with mobility dif(cid:196)culties and the provision of 
safe breastfeeding areas in temporary communal settlements. Appropriate 
access  to  facilities  for  older  people,  those  with  physical  disabilities  and 
those who need fre(cid:88)uent access should be ensured. (cid:40)dministrative of(cid:196)ces, 
warehousing and staff accommodation and quarantine areas in temporary 
communal settlements should be provided as required (see WASH standard 1 
on page 89 and Health systems standard 1 on page 296).

4.  Access:  (cid:40)ccess  to  the  settlement,  the  condition  of  local  road  infrastruc-
ture  and  proximity  to  transport  hubs  for  the  supply  of  relief  assistance 
should be assessed, taking into account seasonal constraints, ha(cid:97)ards and 
security risks. For temporary communal settlements, the site itself and any 
primary storage and food distribution points should be accessible by heavy 
trucks  from  an  all-weather  road.  Other  facilities  should  be  accessible  by 
light vehicles. Roads and pathways within settlements should provide safe, 
secure and all-weather access to individual dwellings and communal facili-
ties  including  schools  and  healthcare  facilities.  (cid:40)rti(cid:196)cial  lighting  should  be 
provided  as  required.  Within  temporary  communal  settlements  or  collec-
tive  centres,  access  and  escape  routes  should  avoid  creating  isolated  or 
screened areas that could pose a threat to the personal safety of users. Steps 
or changes of level close to exits in collective centres should be avoided and 
handrails for any stairways and ramps should be provided. For occupants 
with mobility dif(cid:196)culties, space on the ground (cid:197)oor should be provided, close 
to exits or along access routes without changes of level. The occupants of 
buildings used as collective centres should be within an agreed reasonable 
distance of a minimum of two exits, providing alternative escape routes, and 
these exits should be clearly visible.

5.  Site  selection  and  drainage:  Surface  water  drainage  and  the  risks  of 
ponding or (cid:197)ooding should be assessed when selecting sites and planning 
temporary communal settlements. The site gradient should not exceed (cid:28) per 
cent, unless extensive drainage and erosion control measures are taken, or 
be less than 1 per cent to provide for adequate drainage. Drainage channels 
may still be re(cid:88)uired to minimise (cid:197)ooding or ponding. The lowest point of the 
site should be not less than three metres above the estimated maximum level 
of the water table. The ground conditions should be suitable for excavating 
toilet pits and should inform the locations of toilets and other facilities (see 
Excreta disposal standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages 1(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:182)1(cid:23)7 and (cid:43)rainage standard 1 
on page 121).

256

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

6.  Site  planning  for  temporary  communal  settlements:  Space  allocation 
within  collective  centres  and  household  plots  within  temporary  planned 
camps  should  be  informed  by  existing  social  practices  and  use  of  shared 
resources, including water and sanitation facilities, communal cooking, food 
distribution,  etc.  Neighbourhood  planning  should  support  existing  social 
networks, contribute to security and enable self-management by the affected 
population. The plot layout in temporary planned camps should maintain the 
privacy and dignity of separate households by ensuring that each household 
shelter  opens  onto  common  space  or  a  screened  area  for  the  use  of  the 
household instead of being opposite the entrance to another shelter. Safe, 
integrated  living  areas  for  displaced  populations  that  include  a  signi(cid:196)cant 
number of single adults or unaccompanied children should be provided. For 
dispersed settlements, the principles of neighbourhood planning should also 
apply, e.g. groups of households return to a de(cid:196)ned geographical area or 
identify host families in close proximity to one another (see Protection Prin-
ciple 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).

7.  Surface area of temporary planned or self-settled camps: For camp-
type settlements, a minimum usable surface area of (cid:27)(cid:28) s(cid:88)uare metres for 
each person including household plots should be provided. The area should 
have  the  necessary  space  for  roads  and  footpaths,  external  household 
cooking areas or communal cooking areas, educational facilities and recre-
ational areas, sanitation, (cid:196)rebreaks, administration, water storage, distribu-
tion areas, markets, storage and limited kitchen gardens for individual house-
holds. Where communal services can be provided by existing or additional 
facilities outside of the planned area of the settlement, the minimum usable 
surface  area  should  be  (cid:26)(cid:23)m2  for  each  person.  Area  planning  should  also 
consider  changes  in  the  population.  If  the  minimum  surface  area  cannot 
be  provided,  the  conse(cid:88)uences  of  higher-density  occupation  should  be 
mitigated,  for  example  through  ensuring  ade(cid:88)uate  separation  and  privacy 
between individual households, space for the re(cid:88)uired facilities, etc.

8.  Fire  safety:  (cid:40)ssess  (cid:196)re  risks  to  inform  the  site  planning  of  temporary 
communal  settlements  and  the  grouping  of  individual  household  shelters. 
Mitigating  actions  should  include  the  provision  of  a  (cid:26)(cid:23)-metre  (cid:196)rebreak 
between every (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23) metres of built-up area, and a minimum of (cid:25) metres (cid:15)but 
preferably twice the overall height of any structure) between individual build-
ings or shelters to prevent collapsing structures from touching adjacent build-
ings. Preferred cooking practices and the use of stoves or heaters should 
also  inform  the  overall  site  planning  and  the  safe  separation  of  household 
shelters (see Non-food items standard 4 on page 274).

9.  Vector  risks:  Low-lying  areas,  debris  resulting  from  the  disaster,  vacant 
buildings  and  excavations,  such  as  those  resulting  from  the  use  of  local 

257

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

earth for construction, can provide breeding grounds for pests which could 
pose  health  risks  to  nearby  populations.  For  temporary  communal  settle-
ments, appropriate site selection and the mitigation of vector risks are key to 
reducing the impact of vector-borne diseases on affected populations (see 
(cid:61)ector control standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on page 111(cid:182)11(cid:29)(cid:16).

Shelter and settlement standard 3: Covered living space

People  have  suf(cid:196)cient  covered  living  space  providing  thermal 
comfort,  fresh  air  and  protection  from  the  climate  ensuring  their 
privacy,  safety  and  health  and  enabling  essential  household  and 
livelihood activities to be undertaken.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Ensure that each affected household has adequate covered living space (see 
guidance notes 1–2).

 »

 »

 »

 »

Enable safe separation and privacy as re(cid:88)uired between the sexes, between 
different age groups and between separate families within a given household 
as re(cid:88)uired (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Ensure that essential household and livelihood activities can be carried out 
within the covered living space or adjacent area (see guidance note 4).

Promote  the  use  of  shelter  solutions  and  materials  that  are  familiar  to  the 
disaster-affected  population  and,  where  possible,  culturally  and  socially 
acceptable and environmentally sustainable (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

(cid:40)ssess  the  speci(cid:196)c  climatic  conditions  for  all  seasons  to  provide  optimal 
thermal comfort, ventilation and protection (cid:15)see guidance notes 7(cid:182)1(cid:23)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

(cid:40)ll affected individuals have an initial minimum covered (cid:197)oor area of (cid:26).(cid:28)m2 per 
person (see guidance notes 1–2).

 »

All shelter solutions and materials meet agreed technical and performance 
standards and are culturally acceptable (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)1(cid:23)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Climate and context: In cold climates, household activities typically take 
place within the covered area and affected populations may spend substan-
tial  time  inside  to  ensure  ade(cid:88)uate  thermal  comfort.  In  urban  settings, 

258

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

household  activities  typically  occur  within  the  covered  area  as  there  is 
usually  less  adjacent  external  space  that  can  be  used.  (cid:40)  covered  (cid:197)oor 
area in excess of (cid:26).(cid:28)m2 per person will often be required to meet these 
considerations. The (cid:197)oor-to-ceiling height is also a key factor, with greater 
height  being  preferable  in  hot  and  humid  climates  to  aid  air  circulation, 
while a lower height is preferable in cold climates to minimise the internal 
volume that requires heating. The internal (cid:197)oor-to-ceiling height should be 
a minimum of two metres at the highest point. In warmer climates, adjacent 
shaded  external  space  can  be  used  for  food  preparation  and  cooking. 
Shelter solutions may have to accommodate a range of climatic extremes 
from cold nights and winters to hot days and summers. Where materials 
for a complete shelter cannot be provided, roo(cid:196)ng materials to provide the 
minimum covered area should be prioritised. The resulting enclosure may 
not provide the necessary protection from the climate nor security, privacy 
and  dignity,  so  steps  should  be  taken  to  meet  these  needs  as  soon  as 
possible (see guidance note 2).

2.  Duration: In the immediate aftermath of a disaster, particularly in extreme 
climatic  conditions  where  shelter  materials  are  not  readily  available,  a 
covered area of less than (cid:26).(cid:28)m2 per person may be appropriate to save life 
and to provide ade(cid:88)uate short-term shelter. In such instances, the covered 
area  should  reach  (cid:26).(cid:28)m2  per  person  as  soon  as  possible  to  minimise 
adverse impact on the health and well-being of the people accommodated. 
If (cid:26).(cid:28)m2 per person cannot be achieved, or is in excess of the typical space 
used  by  the  affected  or  neighbouring  population,  the  impact  on  dignity, 
health and privacy of a reduced covered area should be considered. Any 
decision to provide less than (cid:26).(cid:28)m2 per person should be highlighted, along 
with actions to mitigate adverse effects on the affected population. Tempo-
rary or transitional shelter solutions may be required to provide adequate 
shelter for an extended duration, through different seasonal climates and 
potentially  for  several  years.  Response  plans  agreed  with  local  authori-
ties or others should ensure that temporary or transitional shelters are not 
allowed to become default permanent housing.

3.  Cultural  practices,  safety  and  privacy:  Existing  local  practices  in  the 
use of covered living space, for example sleeping arrangements and the 
accommodation of extended family members, should inform the covered 
area required. Consultation should include members of vulnerable groups 
and  those  caring  for  such  individuals.  Opportunities  for  internal  subdivi-
sion within individual household shelters should be provided. In collective 
accommodation,  the  grouping  of  related  families,  well-planned  access 
routes  through  the  covered  area  and  materials  to  screen  personal  and 
household space can aid the provision of adequate personal privacy and 

259

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

safety.  The  psychosocial  bene(cid:196)ts  of  ensuring  ade(cid:88)uate  space  provision 
and privacy while minimising overcrowding should be maximised in both 
individual  household  shelters  and  temporary  collective  accommodation 
(cid:15)see Protection Principle 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:16).

4.  Household  and  livelihood  activities:  The  covered  area  should  provide 
space  for  the  following  activities:  sleeping,  washing  and  dressing;  care 
of  infants,  children  and  the  ill  or  in(cid:196)rm;  storage  of  food,  water,  house-
hold  possessions  and  other  key  assets;  cooking  and  eating  indoors 
when  re(cid:88)uired;  and  the  common  gathering  of  the  household  members. 
The  planning  of  the  covered  area,  in  particular  the  location  of  openings 
and subdivisions, should maximise the use of the internal space and any 
adjacent external area.

5.  Shelter solutions, materials and construction: (cid:43)e(cid:196)ned shelter solutions 
such  as  family  tents,  shelter  kits,  packages  of  materials  or  prefabricated 
buildings should be provided where local post-disaster shelter options are 
not  readily  available,  are  inade(cid:88)uate  or  cannot  be  sustainably  supported 
by  the  local  natural  environment.  Where  reinforced  plastic  sheeting  is 
provided as a relief item for emergency shelter, it should be complemented 
with rope, tools, (cid:196)xings and supporting materials such as timber poles or 
locally  procured  framing  elements.  (cid:40)ny  such  materials  or  de(cid:196)ned  shelter 
solutions should meet agreed national and international speci(cid:196)cations and 
standards and be acceptable to the affected population. When only part of 
the materials for a basic shelter are provided (cid:15)e.g. plastic sheeting(cid:16), assess 
and mitigate any potential adverse impact on the local economy or natural 
environment of the sourcing of other materials needed (e.g. timber poles 
for  framing(cid:16).  The  technical  and  (cid:196)nancial  ability  of  the  affected  population 
to maintain and repair their shelter should also inform the speci(cid:196)cation of 
materials and technologies (cid:15)see Non-food items standard (cid:28) on page (cid:25)7(cid:29)(cid:16). 
Regular monitoring should be undertaken to ensure that the performance 
of shelter solutions remains adequate over time.

6.  Participatory design: All members of each affected household should be 
involved to the maximum extent possible in determining the type of shelter 
assistance  to  be  provided.  The  opinions  of  those  groups  or  individuals 
who typically have to spend more time within the covered living space and 
those  with  speci(cid:196)c  accessibility  needs  should  be  prioritised.  This  should 
be informed by assessments of existing typical housing. Make households 
aware  of  the  disadvantages  as  well  as  advantages  of  unfamiliar  ‘modern’ 
forms  of  construction  and  materials  which  may  be  seen  as  improving  the 
social status of such households (cid:15)see Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16).

7. 

In  warm,  humid  climates:  Shelters  should  be  oriented  and  designed  to 
maximise ventilation and minimise entry of direct sunlight. The roof should 
have a reasonable slope for rainwater drainage with large overhangs except 

260

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

8. 

9. 

in locations vulnerable to high winds. The construction of the shelter should 
be lightweight, as low thermal capacity is re(cid:88)uired. (cid:40)de(cid:88)uate surface water 
drainage  should  be  ensured  around  the  shelter  together  with  the  use  of 
raised (cid:197)oors to minimise the risk of water entering the covered area.

In hot, dry climates: Construction should be heavyweight to ensure high 
thermal capacity, allowing changes in night and day temperatures to alter-
nately  cool  and  heat  the  interior,  or  lightweight  with  ade(cid:88)uate  insulation. 
Care should be taken in the structural design of heavyweight construction 
in areas with seismic risks. If only plastic sheeting or tents are available, a 
double-skinned roof should be provided with ventilation between the layers 
to  reduce  radiant  heat  gain.  Door  and  window  openings  positioned  away 
from the direction of the prevailing wind will minimise heating by hot winds 
and  heat  radiation  from  the  surrounding  ground.  Flooring  that  meets  the 
external walling without gaps should be provided to minimise dust and vector 
penetration.

In  cold  climates:  Heavyweight  construction  with  high  thermal  capacity 
is  required  for  shelters  that  are  occupied  throughout  the  day.  Lightweight 
construction  with  low  thermal  capacity  and  substantial  insulation  is  more 
appropriate  for  shelters  that  are  occupied  only  at  night.  Minimise  air  (cid:197)ow, 
particularly around door and window openings, to ensure personal comfort 
while also providing adequate ventilation for space heaters or cooking stoves. 
Stoves or other forms of space heaters are essential and must be appropriate 
to the shelter. (cid:40)ssess and mitigate potential (cid:196)re risks from the use of stoves 
and  heaters  (see  Non-food  items  standard  4  on  page  274).  Surface-water 
drainage  should  be  provided  around  the  shelter  and  raised  (cid:197)oors  should 
be used to minimise the risk of water due to rain or snow melt from entering 
the covered area. The loss of body heat through the (cid:197)oor should be mini-
mised by ensuring that the (cid:197)oor is insulated and through the use of insulated 
sleeping mats, mattresses or raised beds (cid:15)see Non-food items standard (cid:25) 
on page 271).

10.  Ventilation and vector control: Adequate ventilation should be provided 
within  individual  household  shelters  and  public  buildings  such  as  schools 
and healthcare facilities to maintain a healthy internal environment, minimise 
the effect of smoke from indoor household stoves and resulting respiratory 
infections  and  eye  problems  and  limit  the  risk  of  transmission  of  diseases 
such as T(cid:41) spread by droplet infection. Local building practices, the patterns 
of  shelter  use  by  displaced  people  and  material  selection  should  inform 
vector control measures (see Essential health services – control of commu-
nicable diseases standard 1 on page (cid:26)1(cid:25) and (cid:61)ector control standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) 
on pages 111–116).

261

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Shelter and settlement standard 4: Construction

Local safe building practices, materials, expertise and capacities are 
used where appropriate, maximising the involvement of the affected 
population and local livelihood opportunities.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Involve the affected population, local building professionals and the relevant 
authorities  in  agreeing  appropriate  safe  building  practices,  materials  and 
expertise  which  maximise  local  livelihood  opportunities  (see  guidance 
notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

Ensure access to additional support or resources to disaster-affected people 
who do not have the capacity, ability or opportunity to undertake construc-
tion-related activities (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

 » Minimise structural risks and vulnerabilities through appropriate construction 

and material speci(cid:196)cations (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:27)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 » Meet agreed standards for materials and the quality of work (see guidance 

notes (cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)(cid:16).

 » Manage the provision of materials, labour, technical assistance and regula-
tory  approval  through  appropriate  bidding,  procurement  and  construction 
administration practices (see guidance note 7).

 »

Enable  the  maintenance  and  upgrading  of  individual  household  shelters 
using locally available tools and resources (see guidance note 8).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

All  construction  is  in  accordance  with  agreed  safe  building  practices  and 
standards (see guidance notes 2–7).

 » Construction  activities  demonstrate  the  involvement  of  the  affected  popu-
lation  and  the  maximising  of  local  livelihood  opportunities  (see  guidance 
notes 1(cid:182)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Participation  of  affected  populations:  Participation  by  the  affected 
population in shelter and settlement activities should be informed by existing 
practices through which housing and settlements are planned, constructed 
and  maintained.  Skills  training  programmes  and  apprenticeship  schemes 

262

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

can maximise opportunities for participation during construction, particularly 
for individuals lacking the required building skills or experience. Women of all 
ages should be encouraged to participate in shelter and construction-related 
activities  and  training.  Contributions  from  those  less  able  to  undertake 
physical tasks or those requiring specialist technical expertise can include 
site monitoring and inventory control, the provision of childcare, temporary 
accommodation or the preparation of food for those engaged in construction 
works and administrative support. The other demands on the time and labour 
resources  of  the  affected  population  should  be  considered.  The  provision 
of  assistance  from  volunteer  community  labour  teams  or  contracted 
labour  can  complement  the  involvement  of  individual  households.  Such 
assistance  is  essential  to  support  female-headed  households,  as  women 
may be at particular risk from sexual exploitation in seeking assistance for 
the construction of their shelter (cid:15)see Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28), Protection 
Principle (cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:29) and Non-food items standard (cid:28) on page (cid:25)7(cid:29)(cid:16). Persons 
with  mobility  dif(cid:196)culties,  older  people  and  others  unable  to  undertake 
construction activities may also need assistance.

2.  Technical  expertise  and  experience:  (cid:40)ppropriate  technical  design, 
construction and management expertise should complement the skills and 
understanding of the affected population and provide experience of estab-
lished technical and regulatory processes (see Core Standard 6 on page 71). 
In locations vulnerable to seasonal or cyclical disasters, the involvement of 
technical  specialists  who  have  previous  experiences  of  appropriate,  local 
solutions or agreed best practices can inform the design and construction 
process.

3.  Sourcing of materials and labour: The rapid provision of shelter solutions 
or materials and tools, either separately or in the form of a prede(cid:196)ned kit, can 
enable  the  affected  population  to  erect  or  construct  shelters  themselves. 
Where  possible,  local  livelihoods  should  be  supported  through  the  local 
procurement of building materials, specialist building skills and manual labour 
informed by rapid market assessments and analyses. If the local sourcing of 
materials is likely to have a signi(cid:196)cant adverse impact on the local economy 
or the natural environment, the following may be re(cid:88)uired: the use of multiple 
sources; alternative materials or production processes; materials sourced 
regionally or internationally; or proprietary shelter systems (cid:15)see Shelter and 
settlement standard (cid:28) on page (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:16). The reuse of materials salvaged from 
damaged buildings, having identi(cid:196)ed the rights to such material, should be 
promoted.

4.  Disaster  prevention  and  risk  reduction:  Construction  resilience  should 
be  consistent  with  known  climatic  conditions  and  natural  hazards  and 
should consider adaptations to address the local impact of climate change. 

263

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Changes to building standards or building practices as a result of the disaster 
should be applied in consultation with the disaster-affected population and 
the relevant authorities.

5.  Safe  public  building  design  and  construction:  Temporary  and  perma-
nent  public  buildings  such  as  schools  and  healthcare  facilities  should  be 
constructed  or  repaired  to  be  disaster-resilient  and  to  ensure  safety  and 
access for all. Such facilities should comply with sector-speci(cid:196)c construction 
standards  and  approval  procedures,  including  accessibility  re(cid:88)uirements 
for  those  with  mobility,  visual  or  communication  dif(cid:196)culties.  The  repair  or 
construction of such buildings should be undertaken in consultation with the 
appropriate authorities and informed by an agreed service infrastructure and 
affordable  maintenance  strategy  (see  INEE  Minimum  Standards  in  Educa-
tion: Preparedness, Response, Recovery(cid:16).

6.  Construction standards: Standards and guidelines on construction should 
be agreed with the relevant authorities to ensure that key safety and perfor-
mance  requirements  are  met.  Where  applicable  local  or  national  building 
codes  have  not  been  customarily  adhered  to  or  enforced,  incremental 
compliance  should  be  agreed,  re(cid:197)ecting  local  housing  culture,  climatic 
conditions,  resources,  building  and  maintenance  capacities,  accessibility 
and affordability.

7.  Procurement  and  construction  management:  A  construction  schedule 
should be developed to plan activities. The schedule should include key mile-
stones such as target completion dates, the relocation of displaced popula-
tions to speci(cid:196)c shelter and settlement solutions and the onset of seasonal 
weather patterns. (cid:40) responsive, ef(cid:196)cient and accountable supply chain and 
construction  management  system  for  materials,  labour  and  site  supervi-
sion should also be established. This should include sourcing, procurement, 
transportation, handling and administration, from point of origin through to 
the respective sites as required (see Food security – food transfers standard 4 
on page 188).

8.  Upgrading and maintenance: As initial shelter responses typically provide 
only  a  minimum  level  of  enclosed  space  and  material  assistance,  affected 
populations  will  need  to  seek  alternative  means  of  increasing  the  extent  or 
quality  of  the  enclosed  space  provided.  The  form  of  construction  and  the 
materials used should enable individual households to maintain and incremen-
tally adapt or upgrade the shelter to meet their longer-term needs using locally 
available tools and materials (cid:15)see Non-food items standard (cid:28) on page (cid:25)7(cid:29)(cid:16).

264

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

Shelter and settlement standard 5: Environmental impact

Shelter  and  settlement  solutions  and  the  material  sourcing  and 
construction techniques used minimise adverse impact on the local 
natural environment.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Assess and analyse the adverse impact of the disaster on the local natural 
environment  and  environmental  risks  and  vulnerabilities  (see  guidance 
note 1).

 » Consider the extent of available local natural resources when planning the 
temporary  or  permanent  settling  of  the  affected  population  (see  guidance 
notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

 » Manage  local  natural  environmental  resources  to  meet  the  ongoing  and 

future needs of disaster-affected populations (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

 » Minimise the adverse impact on local natural environmental resources which 
can result from the production and supply of construction materials and the 
building process (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27)(cid:16).

 »

 »

Retain trees and other vegetation where possible to increase water retention, 
minimise soil erosion and provide shade (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Restore  the  location  of  temporary  communal  settlements  to  their  original 
condition  once  they  are  no  longer  needed,  unless  agreed  otherwise  (cid:15)see 
guidance note 6).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

The planning of all return, host or temporary communal settlements demon-
strate that adverse impact on the natural environment has been minimised 
and/or mitigated (see guidance notes 1–6).

 »

The construction processes and sourcing of materials for all shelter solutions 
demonstrate that adverse impact on the local natural environment has been 
minimised and/or mitigated (see guidance note 4).

Guidance notes
1.  Environmental assessment: The impact of a disaster on the natural envi-
ronment should be assessed to inform the response and mitigating activities 
re(cid:88)uired. Many natural disasters, for example landslides, are often a direct 

265

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

result  of  the  mismanagement  of  natural  environmental  resources.  Alterna-
tively, they may be due to existing environmental risks or vulnerabilities, such 
as seasonal (cid:197)ooding in low-lying areas or the lack of natural environmental 
resources that can be safely harvested. An understanding of these risks is 
essential  to  inform  settlement  planning  and  to  ensure  that  known  vulner-
abilities including the impact of climate change are addressed as part of the 
response.

2.  Sustainability and the management of environmental resources: Where 
the  environmental  resources  required  to  support  a  substantial  increase  in 
human habitation are limited, any such unsustainable demand on the natural 
environment should be mitigated. Where such natural resources are avail-
able,  temporary  communal  settlements  should  be  managed  to  minimise 
environmental damage. Sustainable external supplies of fuel and options for 
livestock gra(cid:97)ing, agricultural production and other natural resource-depen-
dent livelihood support activities should be provided and managed. Fewer 
but larger managed settlements may be more environmentally sustainable 
than a larger number of smaller, dispersed settlements that are not as easily 
managed or monitored. The impact on the natural environmental resource 
needs of populations hosting those affected by the disaster or settled close 
to the affected area should be considered.

3.  Mitigating long-term environmental impact: The management of natural 
environmental resources should be considered at all planning levels. Where 
the need to provide shelter for affected populations has a signi(cid:196)cant adverse 
impact  on  the  natural  environment  through  the  depletion  of  local  environ-
mental  resources,  the  long-term  effects  should  be  minimised  through 
complementary  environmental  management  and  rehabilitation  activities. 
Consultation with appropriate environmental agencies is recommended.

4.  Sourcing of construction materials: The environmental impact of sourcing 
natural  environmental  resources  should  be  assessed,  such  as  water, 
construction timber, sand, soil and grasses, as well as fuel for the (cid:196)ring of 
bricks and roof tiles. Identify customary users, extraction and regeneration 
rates and the ownership or control of these resources. Alternative or comple-
mentary  sources  of  supply  may  support  the  local  economy  and  reduce 
any long-term adverse impact on the local natural environment. The use of 
multiple sources and the reuse of salvaged materials, alternative materials 
and production processes (such as the use of stabilised earth blocks) should 
be promoted. This should be combined with mitigation practices, such as 
complementary replanting.

5.  Erosion: Shelter and settlement solutions should be planned to retain trees 
and other vegetation to stabilise the soil and to maximise the opportunities 
for shade and protection from the climate. Natural contours should be used 

266

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

for  such  elements  as  roads,  pathways  and  drainage  networks  in  order  to 
minimise  erosion  and  (cid:197)ooding.  Where  this  cannot  be  achieved,  any  likely 
erosion  should  be  contained  through  the  provision  of  excavated  drainage 
channels,  piped  drainage  runs  under  roadways  or  planted  earth  banks  to 
minimise water run-off (see Drainage standard 1 on page 121).

6.  Handover: The natural regeneration of the environment should be enhanced 
in and around temporary communal settlements through appropriate envi-
ronmental rehabilitation measures. The eventual discontinuation of any such 
settlements  should  be  managed  to  ensure  the  satisfactory  removal  of  all 
material or waste that cannot be reused or that could have an adverse effect 
on the natural environment.

267

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

2. Non-food items:  
clothing, bedding  
and household items

Clothing, blankets and bedding materials meet the most personal human needs 
for shelter from the climate and for the maintenance of health, privacy and dignity. 
Access to basic goods and supplies is required to enable affected populations 
to prepare and consume food, provide thermal comfort, meet personal hygiene 
needs and build, maintain or repair shelters (cid:15)see Hygiene promotion standard (cid:25) 
on page 94 and Water supply standard 1 on page 97).

All  affected  populations  –  whether  they  are  able  to  return  to  the  site  of  their 
orginial homes, are hosted by other families or are accommodated in temporary 
communal settlements – will have individual and household non-food item needs 
that must be assessed and met as appropriate. Populations secondarily affected 
by  disasters,  in  particular  host  families,  may  also  re(cid:88)uire  non-food  item  assis-
tance to meet the additional burden of hosting or the impact of the disaster on 
the local economy and access to such items.

(cid:40)lthough the distribution of non-food items is a common response activity, the 
provision of cash or vouchers to access such non-food items where local markets 
are still functioning should be considered (see Food security – cash and voucher 
transfers standard 1 on page 200).

Items  for  individual  or  household  use  typically  do  not  require  additional  infor-
mation  or  instruction  on  how  they  are  to  be  used.  However,  items  to  support 
shelter repair or construction, for example building materials, (cid:196)xings and tools, will 
usually require additional technical guidance in the safe and effective use of such 
items. Similarly, items to meet personal hygiene needs should be supported by 
appropriate hygiene promotion activities (see Hygiene promotion standards 1–2 
on pages 91–94).

268

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

Non-food items standard 1: Individual, general household and 
shelter support items

The affected population has suf(cid:196)cient individual, general household 
and shelter support items to ensure their health, dignity, safety and 
well-being.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Assess the separate needs of the affected population for non-food items (see 
guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:25) and Water supply standard (cid:26) on page 1(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

Identify  which  non-food  items  can  be  sourced  locally  or  obtained  by  the 
affected  population  themselves  through  the  provision  of  cash  or  voucher 
assistance (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 » Consider the appropriateness of all non-food items within a given package 

(see guidance note 4).

 »

 »

 »

Plan for orderly, transparent and e(cid:88)uitable distributions of all non-food items 
(cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Provide  instruction,  technical  guidance  or  promotion  in  the  use  of  shelter 
support items as required (see guidance note 6).

Plan to replenish non-food items for populations displaced for an extended 
period of time (see guidance note 7).

Key indicator (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

The assessed non-food item needs of the entire disaster-affected population 
have been met (see guidance notes 1–7).

Guidance notes
1.  Needs assessment: The separate needs for personal items, such as clothing 
and  personal  hygiene,  general  household  items,  such  as  food  storage  and 
preparation,  and  items  to  support  the  meeting  of  shelter  needs,  such  as 
plastic sheeting, rope, tools or basic building materials, should be assessed. 
(cid:40)  distinction  should  be  made  between  individual  and  communal  needs,  in 
particular for cooking and fuel. Non-food item needs that can be met using 
familiar,  locally  sourced  products  should  be  identi(cid:196)ed.  The  need  for  boxes, 
bags or similar containers for the storage and transportation of personal and 
household  goods  for  displaced  populations  and  those  in  transit  should  be 
considered for inclusion as part of any non-food item assistance. The provi-
sion of non-food items should be part of an overall disaster response plan (see 

269

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Core Standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages (cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:29)1 and Shelter and settlement standard 1 
on page 249).

2.  Communal  facilities:  Non-food  items  should  be  provided  to  support 
personal hygiene, health, food preparation and cooking, etc., as appropriate 
for schools and other communal facilities. Access should be made available 
to recreation and learning materials. Links should be established between the 
health and education sectors to ensure public health and hygiene messages 
support  the  appropriate  use  of  non-food  items  (see  Hygiene  promotion 
standards  1–2  on  pages  91–94  and  INEE  Minimum  Standards  in  Educa-
tion: Preparedness, Response, Recovery(cid:16).

3.  Sourcing non-food items: Disasters affect the local economy and supply 
chains,  often  necessitating  the  external  sourcing  of  non-food  items  and 
the  direct  distribution  to  individuals,  households  or  communities.  (cid:40)  rapid 
market  analysis  as  part  of  the  initial  needs  assessment  can  determine 
whether familiar non-food items can be sourced locally or in neighbouring, 
non-affected areas. Where the local economy is still functioning, or can be 
supported through speci(cid:196)c assistance in sourcing or supply chain manage-
ment,  the  provision  of  cash  and(cid:22)or  vouchers  can  enable  affected  popula-
tions to manage their own relief item needs (see Food security – cash and 
vouchers standard 1 on page 200). Any such assistance should be planned 
to ensure that vulnerable people are not disadvantaged and that relief needs 
are met.

4.  Relief packages: Non-food items are often packaged and pre-positioned 
in warehouses based on standard speci(cid:196)cations and contents. The (cid:88)uantity 
and  speci(cid:196)cation  of  non-food  items  in  a  household  package  should  be 
considered with reference to the number of people in a typical household, 
their age, sex and the presence of people with speci(cid:196)c needs, as well as the 
items’ cultural acceptability.

5.  Distribution:  Ef(cid:196)cient  and  e(cid:88)uitable  distribution  methods  should  be 
planned in consultation with the affected population. The population should 
be  informed  of  any  such  distributions  and  any  registration  or  assessment 
process required to participate. Formal registration or the allocation of tokens 
should be undertaken. Ensure that vulnerable individuals or households are 
not omitted from distribution lists and can access both the information and 
the distribution itself. A grievance process should be established to address 
any concerns arising during registration or distribution. Relevant local author-
ities should be consulted on which distribution locations are most suitable for 
safe access and receipt of the non-food items, as well as for safe return of 
recipients. The walking distances involved, the terrain and the practicalities 
and cost implications of transporting larger goods such as shelter support 
items should be considered. The monitoring of distributions and the use of 
the provided non-food items should be undertaken to assess the adequacy 

270

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

and appropriateness of both the distribution process and the non-food items 
themselves (cid:15)see Food security (cid:182) food transfers standard (cid:28) on page 19(cid:25)(cid:16).

6.  Promotion,  instruction  and  technical  guidance:  Individual  and  general 
household items should be familiar to the disaster-affected population for use 
without  additional  guidance.  However,  technical  guidance  and  instruction 
should be provided as appropriate to complement the provision of shelter 
support items such as construction materials, tools and (cid:196)xings (cid:15)see Non-food 
items standard (cid:28) on page (cid:25)7(cid:29)(cid:16). Packaging can carry simple diagrams illus-
trating  how  the  items  can  be  used  safely  to  repair  or  construct  safe  and 
adequate  shelter.  The  disaster-affected  population  and  local  construc-
tion  specialists  should  be  involved  in  on-site  awareness-raising  activities 
(cid:15)for  example,  the  repair  or  erection  of  demonstration  shelters(cid:16)  in  order  to 
better understand the construction techniques required. Any weaknesses in 
pre-disaster shelter and settlement design and construction that may have 
contributed to the damage or destruction of homes, and local examples of 
good  practice  that  withstood  the  disaster,  should  be  highlighted  to  those 
involved in construction activities.

7.  Replenishment: The planning of relief distributions should consider the rate 
of consumption, the resulting duration of use and the ability of the affected 
population to replenish such items.

Non-food items standard 2: Clothing and bedding

The  disaster-affected  population  has  suf(cid:196)cient  clothing,  blankets 
and bedding to ensure their personal comfort, dignity, health and 
well-being.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Identify  the  separate  clothing  needs  of  women,  girls,  men  and  boys  of  all 
ages including infants and vulnerable or marginalised individuals and ensure 
access to re(cid:88)uired items in the correct si(cid:97)es and appropriate to the culture, 
season and climate (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

Identify the blanket and bedding needs of the affected population and ensure 
access  to  blankets  and  bedding  as  re(cid:88)uired  to  provide  suf(cid:196)cient  thermal 
comfort  and  to  enable  appropriate  sleeping  arrangements  (see  guidance 
notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

Assess  the  need  for  insecticide-treated  bed  nets  and  provide  as  required 
(cid:15)see (cid:61)ector control standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages 111(cid:182)11(cid:29)(cid:16).

271

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

(cid:40)ll women, girls, men and boys have at least two full sets of clothing in the 
correct  si(cid:97)e  that  are  appropriate  to  the  culture,  season  and  climate  (cid:15)see 
guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

(cid:40)ll affected people have a combination of blankets, bedding, sleeping mats or 
mattresses and insecticide-treated bed nets where re(cid:88)uired to ensure suf(cid:196)-
cient  thermal  comfort  and  enable  appropriate  sleeping  arrangements  (see 
guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:28) and (cid:61)ector control standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages 111(cid:182)11(cid:29)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Changes of clothing: (cid:40)ll affected people should have access to suf(cid:196)cient 
changes of clothing to ensure their thermal comfort, dignity, health and well-
being. This will re(cid:88)uire at least two sets of essential items, particularly under-
clothes, to enable laundering.

2.  Appropriateness:  Clothing  (including  footwear  as  required)  should  be 
appropriate to climatic conditions and cultural practices and sized according 
to need. Infants and children up to 2 years of age should also have a blanket 
in addition to appropriate clothing. (cid:41)edding materials should re(cid:197)ect cultural 
practices and be suf(cid:196)cient in (cid:88)uantity to enable separate sleeping arrange-
ments as required.

3.  Thermal performance: The insulating properties of clothing and bedding 
should be considered, as well as the effect of wet or damp climatic condi-
tions on the thermal performance of such items. A combination of clothing 
and  bedding  items  should  be  considered  to  ensure  the  required  level  of 
thermal  comfort  is  met.  Using  insulated  sleeping  mats  or  mattresses  to 
combat heat loss through the ground may be more effective than providing 
additional blankets.

4.  Durability: Clothing and bedding should be suf(cid:196)ciently durable to accom-

modate typical wear and prolonged usage.

5.  Speciﬁc  needs:  Those  individuals  most  at  risk  should  have  additional 
clothing and bedding to meet their needs. This includes people with inconti-
nence problems, people with chronic illness, pregnant and lactating women, 
older people and individuals with impaired mobility. Infants, children, those 
with restricted mobility and older people are more prone to heat loss and 
hence may re(cid:88)uire additional clothing, blankets, etc., to maintain appropriate 
levels of thermal comfort. Given their lack of mobility, older people and the ill 
or in(cid:196)rm will re(cid:88)uire particular attention, such as the provision of mattresses 
or raised beds.

272

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

Non-food items standard 3: Cooking and eating utensils

The  disaster-affected  population  has  access  to  culturally  appro-
priate items for preparing and storing food, and for cooking, eating 
and drinking.

Key action (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Identify the needs of the affected population for preparing and storing food, 
and for cooking, eating and drinking, and enable access to culturally appro-
priate items as required (see guidance notes 1–2).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Each household or group of four to (cid:196)ve individuals has access to two family-
si(cid:97)ed  cooking  pots  with  handles  and  lids,  a  basin  for  food  preparation  or 
serving, a kitchen knife and two serving spoons (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:25)(cid:16).

 »

(cid:40)ll disaster-affected people have access to a dished plate, a spoon or other 
eating utensils and a mug or drinking vessel (see guidance notes 1–2).

Guidance notes
1.  Appropriateness: The choice of cooking items and eating utensils should 
be  culturally  appropriate  and  should  enable  safe  practices  to  be  followed. 
Women  or  those  typically  overseeing  the  preparation  of  food  should  be 
consulted  when  specifying  items.  The  quantities  of  cooking  items  should 
be informed by cultural practices such as those requiring separate cooking 
arrangements for different family groups within a household or the separa-
tion of particular foods during preparation. The type and size of cooking and 
eating utensils should be suitable for older people, persons with disabilities 
and children.

2.  Materials:  All  plastic  items  (cid:15)buckets,  bowls,  jerrycans,  water  storage 
containers,  etc.(cid:16)  should  be  made  of  food-grade  plastic.  (cid:40)ll  metallic  goods 
(cid:15)cutlery, bowls, plates and mugs, etc.(cid:16), should be stainless steel or enamelled.

273

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Non-food items standard 4: Stoves, fuel and lighting

The disaster-affected population has access to a safe, fuel-ef(cid:196)cient 
stove  and  an  accessible  supply  of  fuel  or  domestic  energy,  or  to 
communal  cooking  facilities.  Each  household  also  has  access  to 
appropriate  means  of  providing  sustainable  arti(cid:196)cial  lighting  to 
ensure personal safety.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Identify and meet household cooking and space heating needs by ensuring 
access to safe, fuel-ef(cid:196)cient stoves, an accessible supply of fuel or domestic 
energy or communal cooking facilities (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

 »

 »

Ensure  that  stoves  can  be  safely  used  and  (cid:196)re  risks  are  minimised  (cid:15)see 
guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

Identify and prioritise environmentally and economically sustainable sources 
of fuel or domestic energy (see guidance note 4).

Ensure  that  fuel  is  sourced  and  stored  in  a  safe  and  secure  manner  (see 
guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Identify and meet household needs for sustainable means of providing arti(cid:196)-
cial lighting and access to matches or a suitable alternative means of igniting 
fuel or candles, etc. (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:29)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Fuel-ef(cid:196)cient stoves with the re(cid:88)uired supply of fuel or domestic energy are 
used by the affected population (cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

 » No incidents are reported of harm to people in the routine use of stoves and 

the sourcing and storage of fuel (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:27)(cid:182)(cid:28)(cid:16).

 »

The disaster-affected population has access to a safe and sustainable means 
of providing arti(cid:196)cial lighting and access to matches or a suitable alternative 
means of igniting fuel or candles, etc. (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:29)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Stoves: The speci(cid:196)cation of stoves is informed by existing local practices. 
Energy-ef(cid:196)cient  cooking  practices  should  be  promoted,  including  the 
use  of  fuel-ef(cid:196)cient  stoves,  (cid:196)rewood  preparation,  (cid:196)re  management,  food 
preparation,  shared  cooking,  etc.  In  communal  accommodation,  common 

274

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

or centralised cooking facilities are preferable to the provision of individual 
household  stoves,  to  minimise  (cid:196)re  risks  and  indoor  smoke  pollution  (cid:15)see 
Food security – food transfers standard 2 on page 184).

2.  Ventilation:  Flues  should  be  (cid:196)tted  to  stoves  in  enclosed  areas  to  vent 
exhaust gases or smoke to the exterior in a safe manner. Weather-protected 
openings should be used to ensure adequate ventilation and to minimise the 
risk of respiratory problems.

3.  Fire safety: Safe separation should be ensured between the stove and the 
elements of the shelter. Internal stoves should be placed on a non-(cid:197)ammable 
base with a non-(cid:197)ammable sleeve around the (cid:197)ue where it passes through 
the structure of the shelter to the exterior. Stoves should be located away 
from entrances and placed to enable safe access during use.

4.  Sustainable sources of fuel: Sources of fuel should be managed, particu-
larly where host or neighbouring communities also rely upon them. Resources 
should  be  replenished  to  ensure  sustainability  of  supply,  e.g.  establishing 
(cid:196)rewood  tree  plantations  to  reduce  or  eliminate  (cid:196)rewood  extraction  from 
existing forests. The use of non-traditional fuel sources should be supported, 
for  example  bri(cid:88)uettes  produced  from  sawdust  and  other  organic  matter, 
where this is acceptable to the affected populations.

5.  Collecting and storing fuel: The disaster-affected population, in particular 
women  and  girls,  should  be  consulted  about  the  location  and  means  of 
collecting fuel for cooking and heating to address issues of personal safety. 
The  demands  of  collecting  fuel  on  particularly  vulnerable  people,  such  as 
female-headed  households,  those  caring  for  chronically  ill  individuals  or 
persons with mobility or access dif(cid:196)culties, should be addressed. The use of 
less labour-intensive fuels should be promoted, including fuel-ef(cid:196)cient stoves 
and accessible fuel sources. Fuel should be stored at a safe distance from 
the stove itself, and any li(cid:88)uid fuel such as kerosene should be kept out of the 
reach of children and infants.

6.  Artiﬁcial  lighting:  Lanterns  or  candles  can  provide  familiar  and  readily 
sourced lighting, although the (cid:196)re risk of using such items should be assesed. 
Provide other types of arti(cid:196)cial lighting to contribute to personal safety in and 
around  settlements  where  general  illumination  is  not  available.  The  use  of 
energy-ef(cid:196)cient arti(cid:196)cial lighting should be considered, such as light-emitting 
diodes (cid:15)LE(cid:43)s(cid:16), and the provision of solar panels to generate localised elec-
trical energy.

275

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Non-food items standard 5: Tools and ﬁxings

The affected population, when responsible for the construction or 
maintenance of their shelter or for debris removal, has access to the 
necessary tools, (cid:196)xings and complementary training.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Identify  and  meet  the  tools  and  (cid:196)xings  needs  of  populations  responsible 
for the safe construction of part or all of their shelters or communal facili-
ties, for the carrying-out of essential maintenance or for debris removal (cid:15)see 
guidance notes 1–2).

 »

 »

Ensure that ade(cid:88)uate mechanisms for the use, maintenance and safekeeping 
of tools and (cid:196)xings, where they are provided for communal or shared use, are 
agreed and commonly understood (see guidance notes 1–2).

Provide training or guidance where necessary in the use of the tools and in 
construction, maintenance or debris removal (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

All households or community groups have access to tools and equipment to 
safely undertake construction, maintenance or debris removal tasks where 
required (see guidance notes 1–2).

 »

All households or community groups have access to training and awareness-
raising in the safe use of tools and (cid:196)xings provided (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Typical tool sets: Tools and (cid:196)xings provided should be familiar and appro-
priate to the context. Fixings, such as nails of different si(cid:97)es, galvanised wire 
and rope, and items to help setting-out and measuring, should be consid-
ered. Communal tools should be provided where such tools are for use on 
public buildings and are only re(cid:88)uired for a limited period of time, or where 
such  resources  are  limited.  (cid:40)ny  such  shared  use,  maintenance  and  safe-
keeping should be agreed before distribution.

2.  Livelihood  activities:  Where  possible,  the  tools  provided  should  also  be 
appropriate  for  livelihood  support  activities.  Tool  use  should  be  monitored 
to  avoid  negative  impacts  on  the  environment  (such  as  unauthorised 

276

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

or  unsustainable  harvesting  of  natural  resources,  etc.(cid:16)  and  any  shared  or 
communal use of such tools.

3.  Training and technical assistance: Training or awareness-raising should 
be available in the safe use and simple maintenance of tools and in planned 
activities.  (cid:40)ssistance  from  extended  family  members,  neighbours  or 
contracted labour to undertake the designated construction or maintenance 
tasks should be provided to female-headed households and other identi(cid:196)ed 
vulnerable people (cid:15)see Shelter and settlements standard (cid:27), guidance note 1 
on page 262).

277

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 1
Shelter, settlement and non-food items assessment 
checklist

This list of questions serves as a guide and checklist to ensure that appropriate 
information is obtained to inform post-disaster shelter and settlement response. 
The list of (cid:88)uestions is not mandatory, and should be used and adapted as appro-
priate. It is assumed that information on the underlying causes of the disaster, the 
security situation, the basic demographics of the displaced and any host popula-
tion and the key people to consult and contact, is separately obtained (cid:15)see Core 
Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1(cid:16).

1 Shelter and settlement

Assessment and coordination
 » Has  an  agreed  coordination  mechanism  been  established  by  the  relevant 

authorities and agencies?

 » What baseline data are available on the affected population and what are the 

known hazards and shelter and settlement risks and vulnerabilities?

 »

Is there a contingency plan to inform the response?

 » What initial assessment information is already available?

 »

Is an inter-agency and/or multisectoral assessment planned and does this 
include shelter, settlement and non-food items(cid:38)

Demographics
 » How many people comprise a typical household?

 » How many people, disaggregated by sex and age, within the disaster-affected 
population comprise individuals who do not form typical households (such 
as  unaccompanied  children)  or  particular  minority  groups  with  household 
sizes that are not typical?

278

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

 » How many affected households lack adequate shelter and where are these 

households?

 » How many people, disaggregated by sex and age, who are not members of 
individual households are without any or with inadequate shelter and where 
are these households?

 » How many affected households who lack adequate shelter have not been 

displaced and can be assisted at the site of their original homes?

 » How  many  affected  households  who  lack  adequate  shelter  have  been 
displaced  and  will  require  shelter  assistance  with  host  families  or  within 
temporary communal settlements?

 » How many people, disaggregated by sex and age, lack access to communal 

facilities such as schools, health clinics and community centres(cid:38)

Risks
 » What is the immediate risk to life of the lack of ade(cid:88)uate shelter, and how 

many people are at risk?

 » What are the potential further risks to lives, health and security of the affected 
population as a result of the ongoing effects of the disaster or other known 
hazards on the provision of shelter?

 » What are the particular risks for vulnerable people, including women, children, 
unaccompanied minors, persons with disabilities or chronic illnesses, due to 
the lack of adequate shelter and why?

 » What  is  the  impact  on  any  host  populations  of  the  presence  of  displaced 

populations?

 » What are the potential risks for con(cid:197)ict or discrimination among or between 

groups within the affected population?

Resources and constraints
 » What are the material, (cid:196)nancial and human resources of the affected popula-

tions to meet some or all of their urgent shelter needs?

 » What are the issues regarding land availability, ownership and usage to meet 
urgent  shelter  needs,  including  temporary  communal  settlements  where 
required?

 » What  are  the  issues  facing  potential  host  populations  in  accommodating 

displaced populations within their own dwellings or on adjacent land?

279

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 » What are the opportunities and constraints of utilising existing, available and 
unaffected  buildings  or  structures  to  accommodate  displaced  populations 
temporarily?

 » What is the topographical and local environmental suitability of using acces-

sible vacant land to accommodate temporary settlements?

 » What are the requirements and constraints of local authority regulations in 

developing shelter solutions?

Materials, design and construction
 » What initial shelter solutions or materials have been provided to date by the 

affected populations or other actors?

 » What existing materials can be salvaged from the damaged site for use in the 

reconstruction of shelters?

 » What are the typical building practices of the affected population and what 
are the different materials that are used to provide the structural frame and 
roof, and external wall enclosures(cid:38)

 » What  alternative  design  or  materials  solutions  are  potentially  available  and 

familiar or acceptable to the affected population?

 » What  design  features  are  required  to  ensure  safe  and  ready  access  to 
and  use  of  shelter  solutions  by  all  members  of  the  affected  population,  in 
particular those with mobility dif(cid:196)culties(cid:38)

 » How can the potential shelter solutions identi(cid:196)ed minimise future risks and 

vulnerabilities?

 » How are shelters typically built and by whom?

 » How are construction materials typically obtained and by whom?

 » How  can  women,  youths,  persons  with  disabilities  and  older  people  be 
trained  or  assisted  to  participate  in  the  building  of  their  own  shelters  and 
what are the constraints?

 » Will additional assistance, through the provision of voluntary or contracted 
labour or technical assistance, be re(cid:88)uired to support individuals or house-
holds lacking the capacity or opportunity to build?

Household and livelihood activities
 » What  household  and  livelihood  support  activities  typically  take  place  in  or 
adjacent to the shelters of the affected population and how does the resulting 
space provision and design re(cid:197)ect these activities(cid:38)

280

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

 » What legal and environmentally sustainable livelihood support opportunities 
can be provided through the sourcing of materials and the construction of 
shelter and settlement solutions?

Essential services and communal facilities
 » What is the current availability of water for drinking and personal hygiene and 
what are the possibilities and constraints in meeting the anticipated sanita-
tion needs?

 » What is the current provision of social facilities (cid:15)health clinics, schools, places 
of worship, etc.(cid:16) and what are the constraints and opportunities of accessing 
these facilities?

 »

If  communal  buildings,  particularly  schools,  are  being  used  for  shelter  by 
displaced populations, what are the process and timeline for returning them 
to the intended use?

Host community and environmental impact
 » What are the issues of concern for the host community?

 » What are the organisational and physical planning issues of accommodating 
the  displaced  populations  within  the  host  community  or  within  temporary 
settlements?

 » What are the local environmental concerns regarding the local sourcing of 

construction materials?

 » What  are  the  local  environmental  concerns  regarding  the  needs  of  the 
displaced population for fuel, sanitation, waste disposal, gra(cid:97)ing for animals, 
if appropriate, etc.(cid:38)

2 Non-food items

Non-food item needs
 » What are the critical non-food items required by the affected population?

 » Can any of the required non-food items be obtained locally?

 »

Is the use of cash or vouchers possible?

 » Will technical assistance be required to complement the provision of shelter 

support items?

281

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Clothing and bedding
 » What type of clothing, blankets and bedding are typically used by women, 
men, children and infants, pregnant and lactating women and older people, 
and what are the particular social and cultural considerations?

 » How many women and men of all ages, children and infants have inade(cid:88)uate or 
insuf(cid:196)cient clothing, blankets or bedding to provide protection from the adverse 
effects of the climate and to maintain their health, dignity and well-being(cid:38)

 » What  are  the  potential  risks  to  the  lives,  health  and  personal  safety  of  the 
affected  population  through  the  need  for  ade(cid:88)uate  clothing,  blankets  or 
bedding?

 » What vector-control measures, particularly the provision of mos(cid:88)uito nets, 

are required to ensure the health and well-being of households?

Cooking and eating, stoves and fuel
 » What  cooking  and  eating  utensils  did  a  typical  household  have  access  to 

before the disaster?

 » How many households do not have access to suf(cid:196)cient cooking and eating 

utensils?

 » How did affected populations typically cook and heat their dwellings before 

the disaster and where did the cooking take place?

 » What fuel was typically used for cooking and heating before the disaster and 

where was this obtained?

 » How  many  households  do  not  have  access  to  a  stove  for  cooking  and 

heating, and why(cid:38)

 » How many households do not have access to adequate supplies of fuel for 

cooking and heating?

 » What  are  the  opportunities  and  constraints,  in  particular  the  natural  envi-
ronmental concerns, of sourcing ade(cid:88)uate supplies of fuel for the disaster-
affected and neighbouring populations?

 » What  is  the  impact  on  the  disaster-affected  population,  and  in  particular 

women of all ages, of sourcing ade(cid:88)uate supplies of fuel(cid:38)

 » What  cultural  issues  regarding  cooking  and  eating  should  be  taken  into 

account?

282

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

Tools and equipment
 » What basic tools to repair, construct or maintain a shelter do the households 

have access to?

 » What livelihood support activities can also utilise the basic tools for construc-

tion, maintenance and debris removal(cid:38)

 » What training or awareness-raising activities are required to enable the safe 

use of tools?

283

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

References and  
further reading

International legal instruments
The Right to (cid:40)de(cid:88)uate Housing (cid:15)(cid:40)rticle 11 (cid:15)1(cid:16) Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights(cid:16), CECSR General Comment (cid:27), 1(cid:25) (cid:43)ecember 1991. Committee on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of  Discrimination  Against  Women 
(cid:15)19(cid:31)1(cid:16); (cid:40)rticle 1(cid:27)(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:16)(cid:15)h(cid:16).
Convention on the Rights of the Child (cid:15)199(cid:23)(cid:16); (cid:40)rticle (cid:25)7(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:16).
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 
(cid:15)19(cid:29)9(cid:16); (cid:40)rticle (cid:28)(cid:15)e(cid:16)(cid:15)iii(cid:16).
International Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (cid:15)19(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:16); (cid:40)rticle (cid:25)1.
(cid:60)niversal (cid:43)eclaration of Human Rights (cid:15)19(cid:27)(cid:31)(cid:16); (cid:40)rticle (cid:25)(cid:28).

General
Corsellis, T and (cid:61)itale, (cid:40) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), Transitional Settlement: (cid:43)isplaced Populations. 
Oxfam. Oxford.
(cid:43)avis, (cid:49) and Lambert, R (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16), Engineering in Emergencies: (cid:40) Practical Guide 
for Relief Workers. RedR/IT Publications. London.
Inter-(cid:40)gency  Network  for  Education  in  Emergencies  (cid:15)INEE(cid:16)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Minimum 
Standards for Education: Preparedness, Response, Recovery. New (cid:64)ork. www.
ineesite.org
Inter-(cid:40)gency  Standing  Committee  (cid:15)I(cid:40)SC(cid:16)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Shelter  Projects  2008.  IASC 
Emergency Shelter Cluster. Geneva.
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (cid:15)IFRC(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), 
Owner-Driven Housing Reconstruction Guidelines. Geneva.
IFRC  and  (cid:60)nited  Nations  Human  Settlements  Programme  (cid:15)(cid:60)N-Habitat(cid:16)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), 
Shelter Projects 2009. IFRC. Geneva.
OCH(cid:40)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Shelter  after  disaster:  strategies  for  transitional  settlement  and 
reconstruction. Geneva.

284

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   S h e l t e r ,   S e t t l e m e n t   a n d   N o n - F o o d   I t e m s

(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Tools 

Pro(cid:61)ention  Consortium 
for  Mainstreaming  (cid:43)isaster  Risk 
Reduction:  Construction  (cid:43)esign,  (cid:41)uilding  Standards  and  Site  Selection, 
Guidance Note 12. Geneva.
(cid:60)nited  Nations  (cid:43)isaster  Relief  Organi(cid:97)ation  (cid:15)(cid:60)N(cid:43)RO(cid:16)  (cid:15)19(cid:31)(cid:25)(cid:16),  Shelter  (cid:40)fter 
Disaster: Guidelines for Assistance. Geneva.
(cid:60)NHCR (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Handbook for Emergencies. Third Edition. Geneva.
(cid:60)nited Nations Of(cid:196)ce for the Coordination of Humanitarian (cid:40)ffairs (cid:15)OCH(cid:40)(cid:16), (cid:60)N 
Refugee (cid:40)gency (cid:15)(cid:60)NHCR(cid:16), Of(cid:196)ce of the (cid:60)N High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(cid:15)OHCHR(cid:16), Food and (cid:40)griculture Organi(cid:97)ation of the (cid:60)N (cid:15)F(cid:40)O(cid:16), Norwegian Refugee 
Council (cid:15)NRC(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Handbook on the Implementation of the (cid:60)N Principles on 
Housing  and  Property  Restitution  Rights  for  Refugees  and  Displaced  Persons 
(The ‘Pinheiro Principles’).
World  (cid:41)ank  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Handbook  for  Post-(cid:43)isaster  Housing  and  Community 
Reconstruction. Washington DC.

Temporary communal settlement
CCCM  Cluster  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Collective  Centre  Guidelines.  (cid:60)NHCR  and  International 
Organization for Migration. Geneva.
NRC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), Camp Management Toolkit. Oslo.

Environment
(cid:50)elly,  C  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Guidelines  for  Rapid  Environmental  Impact  (cid:40)ssessment  in 
(cid:43)isasters.  (cid:41)en(cid:196)eld  Ha(cid:97)ard  Research  Center,  (cid:60)niversity  College  London  and 
CARE International. London.
(cid:50)elly,  C  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Checklist-(cid:41)ased  Guide  to  Identifying  Critical  Environmental 
Considerations in Emergency Shelter Site Selection, Construction, Management 
and Decommissioning. ProAct Network and CARE International.
(cid:60)NHCR  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16),  Environmental  Considerations  in  the  Life  Cycle  of  Refugee 
Camps. Geneva.
WWF  and  (cid:40)merican  Red  Cross  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Green  Recovery  and  Reconstruction 
Toolkit  for  Humanitarian  Aid.  Washington  DC.  www.worldwildlife.org/what/
partners/humanitarian/green-recovery-and-reconstruction-toolkit.html

Cash, vouchers and market assessments
(cid:40)lbu, M (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), The Emergency Market Mapping and (cid:40)nalysis Toolkit. Practical 
(cid:40)ction Publishing. Rugby, (cid:60)(cid:50).

285

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Creti,  P  and  (cid:49)aspars,  S  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16),  Cash  Transfer  Programming  in  Emergencies. 
Oxfam. Oxford
International Committee of the Red Cross (cid:15)ICRC(cid:16) and IFRC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Guidelines for 
cash transfer programming. Geneva.

Disabilities
Handicap International, (cid:43)isability Checklist for Emergency Response.
www.handicap-international.de(cid:22)fileadmin(cid:22)redaktion(cid:22)pdf(cid:22)disability(cid:70)checklist(cid:70)
booklet(cid:70)(cid:23)1.pdf

Gender
I(cid:40)SC 
Opportunities: The Gender Handbook in Humanitarian Action. Geneva.

(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16),  Women,  Girls,  (cid:41)oys  and  Men:  (cid:43)ifferent  Needs  (cid:182)  E(cid:88)ual 

Psychosocial support
I(cid:40)SC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency 
Settings. Geneva.

Schools and public buildings
(cid:60)N  International  Strategy  for  (cid:43)isaster  Reduction,  INEE,  World  (cid:41)ank  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), 
Guidance Notes on Safer School Construction.

Non-food items and emergency items
I(cid:40)SC Emergency Shelter Cluster (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Selecting NFIs for Shelter. Geneva.
IASC  Task  Force  on  Safe  Access  to  Firewood  and  Alternative  Energy  in 
humanitarian  settings  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  (cid:43)ecision  Tree  (cid:43)iagrams  on  Factors  (cid:40)ffecting 
Choice of Fuel Strategy in Humanitarian Settings. Geneva.
ICRC and IFRC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Emergency Items Catalogue. Third Edition. Geneva.
IFRC and Oxfam International (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Plastic Sheeting: a guide to the speci(cid:196)cation 
and use of plastic sheeting in humanitarian relief. Oxford.
(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16),  Emergency  Relief 
Inter-(cid:40)gency  Procurement  Services  Of(cid:196)ces 
Items:  Compendium  of  Generic  Speci(cid:196)cations.  (cid:61)ols  1  and  (cid:25).  United  Nations 
Development Programme. New York.
OCH(cid:40)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16),  Tents:  (cid:40)  Guide  to  the  (cid:60)se  and  Logistics  of  Family  Tents  in 
Humanitarian Relief. Geneva.

286

Minimum Standards  
in Health Action

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

How to use this chapter

This chapter is divided into two main sections:

Health systems
Essential health services

A  health  systems  approach  to  the  design,  implementation,  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  health 
services is adopted as a framework for organising health services during disaster response. This 
is the best approach to ensure that priority health needs are identiﬁed and met in an efﬁcient and 
effective manner. Principles such as supporting national and local health systems, coordination and 
standardisation of tools and approaches are stressed throughout.

The Protection Principles and Core Standards must be used consistently with this chapter. 

Although primarily intended to inform humanitarian response to a disaster, the minimum standards 
may also be considered during disaster preparedness.

Each section contains the following:

  Minimum standards: These are qualitative in nature and specify the minimum levels to be 

attained in disaster response regarding the provision of health services.

 

 

 

Key actions: These are suggested activities and inputs to help meet the standards.

Key indicators: These are ‘signals’ that show whether a standard has been attained. They 
provide a way of measuring and communicating the processes and results of key actions; they 
relate to the minimum standard, not to the key action.

Guidance notes: These include speciﬁc points to consider when applying the minimum stan-
dards, key actions and key indicators in different situations. They provide guidance on tackling 
practical difﬁculties, benchmarks or advice on priority issues. They may also include critical 
issues relating to the standards, actions or indicators, and describe dilemmas, controversies 
or gaps in current knowledge.

If the required key actions and indicators cannot be met, the resulting adverse implications on the 
affected population should be appraised and appropriate mitigating actions taken.

Appendices at the end of the chapter include a checklist for health service assessments, sample 
surveillance reporting forms and formulas for calculating key health indicators. A references and 
further reading section is also provided.

288

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .291

1. Health systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .296

2. Essential health services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .309

2.1. Essential health services – control of communicable diseases  . . . . . . 311

2.2. Essential health services – child health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .320

2.3. Essential health services – sexual and reproductive health . . . . . . . . .325

2.4. Essential health services – injury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .331

2.5. Essential health services – mental health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .333

2.6. Essential health services – non-communicable diseases . . . . . . . . . .336

Appendix 1:  Health assessment checklist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .338

Appendix 2:  Sample weekly surveillance reporting forms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341

Appendix 3:  Formulas for calculating key health indicators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .346

References and further reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .348

289

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Humanitarian 

Charter

Protection 
Principles

Core  

Standards

Health action

Essential 

health 
services 

Standard 1
Prioritising 
health 
services

Child health

Control of 

communicable 

diseases

Standard 1
Communicable 
disease 
prevention

Standard 1
Prevention of 
vaccine-
preventable 
diseases

Standard 2
Communicable 
diseases 
diagnosis 
and case 
management

Standard 2
Management 
of newborn 
and childhood 
illness

Standard 3
Outbreak 
detection and 
response

Sexual and 
reproductive 

health

Standard 1
Reproductive 
health

Standard 2
HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S

Injury

Mental 
health

Non-

communicable 

diseases

Standard 1
Injury care

Standard 1
Mental health

Standard 1
Non-
communicable 
diseases

Health 
systems

Standard 1
Health service 
delivery

Standard 2
Human 
resources

Standard 3
Drugs and 
medical 
supplies

Standard 4
Health 
(cid:196)nancing

Standard 5
Health 
information 
management

Standard 6
Leadership 
and 
coordination

Appendix 1: Health assessment checklist
Appendix 2: Sample weekly surveillance reporting forms
Appendix 3: Formulas for calculating key health indicators

References and further reading

290

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Introduction
Links to the Humanitarian Charter and international law

The minimum standards in health action are a practical expression of the shared 
beliefs and commitments of humanitarian agencies and the common principles, 
rights and duties governing humanitarian action that are set out in the Humanitarian 
Charter. Founded on the principle of humanity, and re(cid:197)ected in international law, 
these principles include the right to life with dignity, the right to protection and 
security, and the right to receive humanitarian assistance on the basis of need. 
A list of key legal and policy docu ments that inform the Humanitarian Charter is 
available for reference in (cid:40)nnex 1 (cid:15)see page (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:16), with explanatory comments for 
humanitarian workers.

Although  states  are  the  main  duty-bearers  with  respect  to  the  rights  set  out 
above, humanitarian agencies have a responsibility to work with disaster-affected 
populations  in  a  way  that  is  consistent  with  these  rights.  From  these  general 
rights (cid:197)ow a number of more speci(cid:196)c entitlements. These include the rights to 
participation,  information  and  non-discrimination,  as  well  the  speci(cid:196)c  rights  to 
water, food, shelter and health that underpin these and the minimum standards 
in this Handbook.

Everyone  has  the  right  to  health,  as  enshrined  in  a  number  of  international 
legal  instruments.  The  right  to  health  can  be  assured  only  if  the  population  is 
protected, if the professionals responsible for the health system are well trained 
and committed to universal ethical principles and professional standards, if the 
system in which they work is designed to meet minimum standards of need, and 
if the state is willing and able to establish and secure these conditions of safety 
and  stability.  In  times  of  armed  con(cid:197)ict,  civilian  hospitals  and  medical  facilities 
may in no circumstances be the object of attack, and health and medical staff 
have the right to be protected. The carrying-out of acts or activities that jeop-
ardise the neutrality of health facilities, such as carrying arms, is prohibited.

The minimum standards in this chapter are not a full expression of the right to 
health.  However,  the  Sphere  standards  re(cid:197)ect  the  core  content  of  the  right  to 
health, especially during emergencies, and contribute to the progressive realisa-
tion of this right globally.

291

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The importance of health action in disasters

Access to healthcare is a critical determinant for survival in the initial stages of 
disaster. (cid:43)isasters almost always have signi(cid:196)cant impacts on the public health and 
well-being of affected populations. The public health impacts may be described 
as direct (e.g. death from violence and injury) or indirect (e.g. increased rates of 
infectious diseases and/or malnutrition). These indirect health impacts are usually 
related to factors such as inade(cid:88)uate (cid:88)uantity and (cid:88)uality of water, breakdowns in 
sanitation, disruption of or reduced access to health services and deterioration of 
food security. Lack of security, movement constraints, population displacement 
and worsened living conditions (overcrowding and inadequate shelter) can also 
pose public health threats. Climate change is potentially increasing vulnerability 
and risk.

The primary goals of humanitarian response to humanitarian crises are to prevent 
and reduce excess mortality and morbidity. The main aim is to maintain the crude 
mortality  rate  (cid:15)CMR(cid:16)  and  under-(cid:28)  mortality  rate  (cid:15)(cid:60)(cid:28)MR(cid:16)  at,  or  reduce  to,  less 
than double the baseline rate documented for the population prior to the disaster 
(cid:15)see table on baseline reference mortality data by region on page (cid:26)11(cid:16). (cid:43)ifferent 
types of disaster are associated with differing scales and patterns of mortality 
and morbidity (cid:15)see table on public health impact of selected disasters opposite(cid:16), 
and the health needs of an affected population will therefore vary according to the 
type and extent of the disaster.

The contribution from the health sector is to provide essential health services, 
including  preventive  and  promotive  interventions  that  are  effective  in  reducing 
health  risks.  Essential  health  services  are  priority  health  interventions  that  are 
effective in addressing the major causes of excess mortality and morbidity. The 
implementation  of  essential  health  services  must  be  supported  by  actions  to 
strengthen the health system. The way health interventions are planned, organ-
ised and delivered in response to a disaster can either enhance or undermine the 
existing health systems and their future recovery and development.

An  analysis  of  the  existing  health  system  is  needed  to  determine  the  system’s 
level of performance and to identify the major constraints to the delivery of, and 
access to, health services. In the early stages of a disaster, information may be 
incomplete and important public health decisions may have to be made without 
all of the relevant data being available. A multi-sectoral assessment should be 
conducted as soon as possible (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1(cid:16).

Better response is achieved through better preparedness. Preparedness is based 
on an analysis of risks and is well linked to early warning systems. Preparedness 

292

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

includes contingency planning, stockpiling of e(cid:88)uipment and supplies, establish-
ment and(cid:22)or maintenance of emergency services and stand-by arrangements, 
communications,  information  management  and  coordination  arrangements, 
personnel training, community-level planning, drills and exercises. The enforce-
ment of building codes can dramatically reduce the number of deaths and serious 
injuries associated with earthquakes and/or ensure that health facilities remain 
functional after disasters.

Public health impact of selected disasters
NB: Even for speci(cid:196)c types of disaster, the patterns of morbidity and mortality 
vary signi(cid:196)cantly from context to context.

Effect

Complex 
emergencies

Earthquakes

High 
winds 
(without 
ﬂooding)

Floods

Flash 
ﬂoods/ 
tsunamis

Deaths

Many

Severe injuries

(cid:61)aries

Many

Many

Few

Moderate

Few

Few

Many

Few

High

(cid:61)aries(cid:17)

Small

(cid:61)aries(cid:17)

(cid:61)aries(cid:17)

Increased 
risk of 
communicable 
diseases

Food scarcity

Common

Rare

Rare

(cid:61)aries

Common

Major 
population 
displacements

Common

Common

 (cid:61)aries

Rare  
(may occur 
in heavily 
damaged 
urban areas)

Rare  
(may occur 
in heavily 
damaged 
urban 
areas)

* Depends on post-disaster displacement and living conditions of the population 
Source: Adapted from Pan American Health Organization, 2000

Links to other chapters

(cid:41)ecause of the impacts of the different determinants of health on health status, 
many of the standards in the other chapters are relevant to this chapter. Progress 
in achieving standards in one area often in(cid:197)uences and even determines progress 
in  other  areas.  For  a  disaster  response  to  be  effective,  close  coordination  and 
collaboration are re(cid:88)uired with other sectors. Coordination with local authorities, 
other responding agencies and community-based organisations is also neces-
sary to ensure that needs are met, that efforts are not duplicated and that the use 

293

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

of resources is optimised and the quality of health services is adequate. Reference 
to speci(cid:196)c standards or guidance notes in other technical chapters is made where 
relevant. Reference is also made to companion and complementary standards.

Links to the Protection Principles and Core Standards

In  order  to  meet  the  standards  of  this  Handbook,  all  humanitarian  agencies 
should be guided by the Protection Principles, even if they do not have a distinct 
protec tion  mandate  or  specialist  capacity  in  protection.  The  Principles  are  not 
‘absolute’:  it  is  recognised  that  circumstances  may  limit  the  extent  to  which 
agencies  are  able  to  ful(cid:196)l  them.  Nevertheless,  the  Principles  re(cid:197)ect  universal 
humanitarian concerns which should guide action at all times. 

The  Core  Standards  are  essential  process  and  personnel  standards  shared 
by  all  sectors.  The  six  core  standards  cover  people-centred  humanitarian 
response;  coordination  and  collaboration;  assessment;  design  and  response; 
performance,  transparency  and  learning;  and  aid  worker  performance.  They 
provide a single reference point for approaches that underpin all other standards 
in the Handbook. Each technical chapter, therefore, re(cid:88)uires the companion use 
of the Core Standards to help attain its own standards. In particular, to ensure 
the  appropriateness  and  (cid:88)uality  of  any  response,  the  participation  of  disaster-
affected people – including the groups and individuals most frequently at risk in 
disasters – should be maximised.

Vulnerabilities and capacities of disaster-affected 
populations

This section is designed to be read in conjunction with, and to reinforce, the Core 
Standards.

It is important to understand that to be young or old, a woman, or a person with a 
disability or HI(cid:61), does not, of itself, make a person vulnerable or at increased risk. 
Rather it is the interplay of factors that does so: for example, someone who is over 
7(cid:23) years of age, lives alone and has poor health is likely to be more vulnerable 
than someone of a similar age and health status living within an extended family 
and with suf(cid:196)cient income. Similarly, a (cid:26)-year-old girl is much more vulnerable if 
she is unaccompanied than if she were living in the care of responsible parents.

(cid:40)s the health action standards and key actions are implemented, a vulnerability 
and capacity analysis helps to ensure that a disaster response effort supports 

294

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

those who have a right to assistance in a non-discriminatory manner and who 
need it most. This requires a thorough understanding of the local context and 
of how a particular disaster impacts on particular groups of people in different 
ways  due  to  their  pre-existing  vulnerabilities  (e.g.  being  very  poor  or  discrimi-
nated  against(cid:16),  their  exposure  to  various  protection  threats  (cid:15)e.g.  gender-based 
violence including sexual exploitation(cid:16), disease incidence or prevalence (cid:15)e.g. HI(cid:61) 
or tuberculosis) and possibilities of epidemics (e.g. measles or cholera). Disasters 
can make pre-existing ine(cid:88)ualities worse. However, support for people(cid:187)s coping  
strategies, resilience and recovery capacities is essential. Their knowledge, skills 
and strategies need to be supported and their access to social, legal, (cid:196)nancial 
and psychosocial support advocated for. The various physical, cultural, economic 
and  social  barriers  they  may  face  in  accessing  these  services  in  an  equitable 
manner also need to be addressed.

The following highlight some of the key areas that will ensure that the rights and 
capacities of all vulnerable people are considered:

 » Optimise  people(cid:187)s  participation,  ensuring  that  all  representative  groups 
are included, especially those who are less visible (cid:15)e.g. persons who have 
communication or mobility dif(cid:196)culties, those living in institutions, stigmatised 
youth and other under- or unrepresented groups).

 » Disaggregate data by sex and age (0–80+ years) during assessment as an 
important element in ensuring that the health sector adequately considers 
the diversity of populations.

 »

Ensure that the right to information on entitlements is communicated in a way 
that is inclusive and accessible to all members of the population.

295

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The minimum standards

1. Health systems

The World Health Organi(cid:97)ation (cid:15)WHO(cid:16) de(cid:196)nes health systems as: (cid:184)all the organi-
(cid:97)ations, institutions and resources that are devoted to producing health actions(cid:185). 
It  includes  the  full  range  of  players  engaged  in  the  provision,  (cid:196)nancing  and 
management of health services, efforts to in(cid:197)uence determinants of health as well 
as providing direct health services, and encompassing all levels: central, regional, 
district, community and household.

The  health  system  standards  of  Sphere  are  organised  according  to  the  WHO 
health  system  framework,  consisting  of  six  building  blocks:  leadership,  human 
resources,  drugs  and  medical  supplies,  health  (cid:196)nancing,  health  information 
management and service delivery. There are many interconnections and inter-
actions  between  each  of  these  functions  and  an  action  affecting  one  compo-
nent can affect the others. These health system building blocks are the functions 
that are required to deliver essential health services. Health interventions during 
disaster response should be designed and implemented in a way that contributes 
to strengthening health systems.

Health systems standard 1: Health service delivery

People  have  e(cid:88)ual  access  to  effective,  safe  and  (cid:88)uality  health 
services that are standardised and follow accepted protocols and 
guidelines.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Provide health services at the appropriate level of the health system. Levels 
include household and community, clinic or health post, health centre and 
hospital (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

Adapt or establish standardised case management protocols for the most 
common diseases, taking account of national standards and guidelines (cid:15)see 
guidance note 2).

Establish or strengthen a standardised referral system and ensure it is utilised 
by all agencies (see guidance note 1).

296

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

Establish or strengthen a standardised system of triage at all health facilities 
to ensure those with emergency signs receive immediate treatment.

Initiate  health  education  and  promotion  at  community  and  health  facility 
levels (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Establish and follow safe and rational use of blood supply and blood products 
(cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Ensure that laboratory services are available and used when indicated (see 
guidance note 6).

(cid:40)void the establishment of alternative or parallel health services, including 
mobile clinics and (cid:196)eld hospitals (cid:15)see guidance notes 7(cid:182)(cid:31)(cid:16).

 » (cid:43)esign health services in a manner that ensures patients(cid:187) rights to privacy, 

con(cid:196)dentiality and informed consent (cid:15)see guidance note 9(cid:16).

 »

Implement  appropriate  waste  management  procedures,  safety  measures 
and infection control methods in health facilities (see guidance notes 10–11 
and Solid waste management standard 1 on page 117).

 » (cid:43)ispose of dead bodies in a manner that is digni(cid:196)ed, culturally appropriate 
and based on good public health practice (see guidance note 12 and Solid 
waste management standard 1, guidance note (cid:31) on page 1(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

There are an adequate number of health facilities to meet the essential health 
needs of all the disaster-affected population:

 - one  basic  health  unit(cid:22)1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)  population  (cid:15)basic  health  units  are  primary 

healthcare facilities where general health services are offered)

 - one health centre(cid:22)(cid:28)(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) people
 - one district or rural hospital(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) people
 - (cid:37)1(cid:23) inpatient and maternity beds(cid:22)1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) people 
(see guidance note 1).

 » Utilisation  rates  at  health  facilities  are  2–4  new  consultations/person/year 
among the disaster-affected population and >1 new consultations/person/
year  among  rural  and  dispersed  populations  (see  guidance  note  4  and 
(cid:40)ppendix (cid:26): Formulas for calculating key health indicators(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Level of care: Health facilities are categorised by level of care according to 
their size and the services provided. The number and location of health facili-
ties required can vary from context to context. 

297

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Health systems must also develop a process for continuity of care. This is best 
achieved by establishing an effective referral system, especially for life-saving 
interventions. The referral system should function (cid:25)(cid:27) hours a day, seven days 
a week.

2.  National standards and guidelines: In general, agencies should adhere to 
the health standards and guidelines of the country where the disaster response 
is being implemented, including treatment protocols and essential medicines 
lists. When they are outdated or do not re(cid:197)ect evidence-based practice, inter-
national standards should be used as reference and the lead agency for the 
health sector should support the Ministry of Health (MOH) to update them.

3.  Health  promotion:  An  active  programme  of  community  health  promotion 
should be initiated in consultation with local health authorities and community 
representatives, ensuring a balanced representation of women and men. The 
programme should provide information on the major health problems, health 
risks, the availability and location of health services and behaviours that protect 
and  promote  good  health,  and  address  and  discourage  harmful  practices. 
Public  health  messages  and  materials  should  utilise  appropriate  language 
and media, be culturally sensitive and easy to understand. Schools and child-
friendly spaces are important venues for spreading information and reaching 
out  to  children  and  parents  (see  INEE  Minimum  Standards  for  Education  – 
access and learning environment standard (cid:26)(cid:16).

4.  Utilisation rate of health services: There is no minimum threshold (cid:196)gure for 
the  use  of  health  services,  as  this  will  vary  from  context  to  context.  (cid:40)mong 
stable rural and dispersed populations, utilisation rates should be at least 1 new 
consultation(cid:22)person(cid:22)year. (cid:40)mong disaster-affected populations, an average of 
2–4 new consultations/person/year may be expected. If the rate is lower than 
expected, it may indicate inade(cid:88)uate access to health services. If the rate is 
higher, it may suggest over-utilisation due to a speci(cid:196)c public health problem or 
under-estimation of the target population. In analysing utilisation rates, consid-
eration should ideally also be given to utilisation by sex, age, ethnic origin and 
disability (cid:15)see (cid:40)ppendix (cid:26): Formulas for calculating key health indicators(cid:16).

5.  Safe blood transfusion: Efforts should be coordinated with the national blood 
transfusion service (cid:15)(cid:41)TS(cid:16), if one exists. Collection of blood should only be from 
voluntary  non-remunerated  blood  donors.  Good  laboratory  practice  should 
be  established,  including  screening  for  transfusion-transmissible  infections, 
blood  grouping,  compatibility  testing,  blood  component  production  and  the 
storage and transportation of blood products. Unnecessary transfusions can 
be  reduced  through  the  effective  clinical  use  of  blood,  including  the  use  of 
alternatives to transfusion (cid:15)crystalloids and colloids(cid:16), wherever possible. (cid:40)ppro-
priate clinical staff should be trained to ensure the provision of safe blood and 
its effective clinical use.

298

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

6.  Laboratory  services:  The  most  common  communicable  diseases  can  be 
diagnosed  clinically  (cid:15)e.g.  diarrhoea,  acute  respiratory  infections(cid:16)  or  with  the 
assistance of rapid diagnostic tests or microscopy (e.g. malaria). Laboratory 
testing is most useful for con(cid:196)rming the cause of a suspected outbreak, testing 
for culture and antibiotic sensitivity to assist case management decisions (e.g. 
dysentery) and selecting vaccines where mass immunisation may be indicated 
(cid:15)e.g.  meningococcal  meningitis(cid:16).  For  certain  non-communicable  diseases, 
such as diabetes, laboratory testing is essential for diagnosis and treatment.

7.  Mobile  clinics:  (cid:43)uring  some  disasters,  it  may  be  necessary  to  operate 
mobile clinics in order to meet the needs of isolated or mobile populations 
who have limited access to healthcare. Mobile clinics have also been proven 
crucial in increasing access to treatment in outbreaks where a large number 
of cases are expected, such as malaria outbreaks. Mobile clinics should be 
introduced only after consultation with the lead agency for the health sector 
and with local authorities (cid:15)see Health systems standard (cid:29) on page (cid:26)(cid:23)7(cid:16).

8.  Field hospitals: Occasionally, (cid:196)eld hospitals may be the only way to provide 
healthcare  when  existing  hospitals  are  severely  damaged  or  destroyed. 
However, it is usually more effective to provide resources to existing hospi-
tals so that they can start working again or cope with the extra load. It may 
be appropriate to deploy a (cid:196)eld hospital for the immediate care of traumatic 
injuries  (cid:15)(cid:196)rst  (cid:27)(cid:31)  hours(cid:16),  secondary  care  of  traumatic  injuries  and  routine 
surgical and obstetrical emergencies (cid:15)days (cid:26)(cid:182)1(cid:28)(cid:16) or as a temporary facility 
to substitute for a damaged local hospital until it is reconstructed. Because 
(cid:196)eld hospitals are highly visible, there is often substantial political pressure 
from donor governments to deploy them. However, it is important to make 
the decision to deploy (cid:196)eld hospitals based solely on need and value added.

9.  Patients’  rights:  Health  facilities  and  services  should  be  designed  in  a 
manner that ensures privacy and con(cid:196)dentiality. Informed consent should be 
sought from patients (cid:15)or their guardians if they are not competent to do so(cid:16), 
prior to medical or surgical procedures. Health staff should understand that 
patients have a right to know what each procedure involves, as well as its 
expected bene(cid:196)ts, potential risks, costs and duration.

10.  Infection control in healthcare settings and patient safety: For an effective 
response during disasters, continuing infection prevention and control (cid:15)IPC(cid:16) 
programmes should be enforced at both national and peripheral levels, and 
at the various healthcare facility levels. Such an IPC programme at a health-
care facility should include:

 - de(cid:196)ned IPC policies (cid:15)e.g. routine and additional infection control measures 

to address potential threats)

299

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 - (cid:88)uali(cid:196)ed,  dedicated  technical  staff  (cid:15)IPC  team(cid:16)  to  run  infection  control 

programme with a de(cid:196)ned scope, function and responsibility

 - early warning surveillance system for detection of communicable disease 

outbreaks

 - de(cid:196)ned budget for activities (cid:15)e.g. training of staff(cid:16) and supplies in response 

to an emergency

 - reinforced  standard  precautions  and  additional  speci(cid:196)c  precautions 

de(cid:196)ned for an epidemic disease

 - administrative controls (e.g. isolation policies) and environmental and engi-

neering controls (e.g. improving environmental ventilation)

 - personal protective equipment used
 - IPC practices monitored and recommendations reviewed regularly.

11.  Healthcare waste: Hazardous waste generated in healthcare facilities can 
be segregated into infectious non-sharp waste, sharps and non-infectious 
common wastes. Poor management of healthcare waste potentially exposes 
health staff, cleaners, waste handlers, patients and others in the community 
to infections such as HI(cid:61) and hepatitis (cid:41) and C. Proper separation at the point 
of origin of the waste through to (cid:196)nal category speci(cid:196)c disposal procedures 
must be implemented in order to minimise the risk of infection. The personnel 
assigned to handle healthcare waste should be properly trained and should 
wear  protective  equipment  (gloves  and  boots  are  minimum  requirements). 
Treatment should be done according to the type of waste: for example, infec-
tious  non-sharp  waste  as  well  as  sharps  should  be  either  disposed  of  in 
protected pits or incinerated.

12.  Handling the remains of the dead: When disasters result in high mortality, 
the management of a large number of dead bodies will be required. Burial of 
large numbers of human remains in mass graves is often based on the false 
belief that they represent a health risk if not buried or burned immediately. In 
only a few special cases (e.g. deaths resulting from cholera or haemorrhagic 
fevers(cid:16)  do  human  remains  pose  health  risks  and  re(cid:88)uire  speci(cid:196)c  precau-
tions.Bodies  should  not  be  disposed  of  unceremoniously  in  mass  graves. 
People  should  have  the  opportunity  to  identify  their  family  members  and 
to conduct culturally appropriate funerals. Mass burial may be a barrier to 
obtaining death certi(cid:196)cates necessary for making legal claims. When those 
being buried are victims of violence, forensic issues should be considered 
(cid:15)see Shelter and settlement standard (cid:25), guidance note (cid:26) on page (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:16).

300

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Health systems standard 2: Human resources

Health services are provided by trained and competent health work-
forces who have an adequate mix of knowledge and skills to meet 
the health needs of the population.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Review  staf(cid:196)ng  levels  and  capacity  as  a  key  component  of  the  baseline 
health assessment.

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

(cid:40)ddress imbalances in the number of staff, their mix of skills and gender and(cid:22)
or ethnic ratios where possible (see guidance note 1).

Support local health workers and integrate them fully into health services, 
taking account of their competence (see guidance note 1).

Ensure  adequate  ancillary  workers  for  support  functions  in  each  health 
facility.

Train clinical staff in the use of clinical protocols and guidelines (see guidance 
note 2).

Provide  supportive  supervision  to  staff  on  a  regular  basis  to  ensure  their 
compliance with standards and guidelines, including provision of feedback.

Standardise training programmes and prioritise them according to key health 
needs and competence gaps.

Ensure fair and reliable remuneration for all health workers, agreed between 
all agencies and in collaboration with the national health authorities.

Ensure a safe working environment, including basic hygiene and protection 
for all health workers.

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

There are at least (cid:25)(cid:25) (cid:88)uali(cid:196)ed health workers (cid:15)medical doctors, nurses and 
midwifes(cid:16)(cid:22)1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) population (cid:15)see guidance note 1(cid:16):

 - at least one medical doctor(cid:22)(cid:28)(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) population
 - at least one (cid:88)uali(cid:196)ed nurse(cid:22)1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) population
 - at least one midwife(cid:22)1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) population.

 »

There  is  at  least  one  Community  Health  Worker  (cid:15)CHW(cid:16)(cid:22)1,(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)  population,  
one supervisor/10 home visitors and one senior supervisor.

301

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 » Clinicians are not re(cid:88)uired to consult more than (cid:28)(cid:23) patients a day consis-
tently.  If  this  threshold  is  regularly  exceeded,  additional  clinical  staff  are 
recruited (cid:15)see guidance note 1 and (cid:40)ppendix (cid:26): Formulas for calculating key 
health indicators).

Guidance notes
1.  Stafﬁng levels: The health workforce includes a wide range of health workers 
including  medical  doctors,  nurses,  midwives,  clinical  of(cid:196)cers  or  physician 
assistants, lab technicians, pharmacists, CHWs, etc., as well as management 
and support staff. There is no consensus about an optimal level of health 
workers for a population and this can vary from context to context. However, 
there is correlation between the availability of health workers and coverage 
of health interventions. For example, the presence of just one female health 
worker or one representative of a marginalised ethnic group on a staff may 
signi(cid:196)cantly increase the access of women or people from minority groups 
to  health  services.  Imbalance  in  staf(cid:196)ng  must  be  addressed  through  the 
redeployment and/or recruitment of health workers to areas where there are 
critical gaps in relation to health needs (see Core Standard 6 on page 71).

2.  Training and supervision of staff: Health workers should have the proper 
training,  skills  and  supervisory  support  for  their  level  of  responsibility. 
Agencies have an obligation to train and supervise staff to ensure that their 
knowledge  is  up-to-date.  Training  and  supervision  will  be  high  priorities 
especially where staff have not received continuing education or where new 
protocols  are  introduced.  (cid:40)s  far  as  possible,  training  programmes  should 
be standardised and prioritised according to key health needs and compe-
tence gaps identi(cid:196)ed through supervision. Records should be maintained of 
who has been trained in what by whom, when and where. These should be 
shared with the human resources section of the local health authorities (see 
Core Standard 6 on page 71).

Health systems standard 3: Drugs and medical supplies

People have access to a consistent supply of essential medicines 
and consumables.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Review  the  existing  lists  of  essential  medicines  of  the  disaster-affected 
country  early  in  the  response  to  determine  their  appropriateness  (see 
guidance note 1).

302

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

 »

 »

 »

 »

Establish  and  endorse  a  standardised  essential  medicines  and  medical 
equipment list that contains items appropriate for the health needs and the 
competence level of health workers (see guidance notes 1–2).

Establish or adapt an effective medicines management system (see guidance 
note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Ensure  essential  medicines  for  the  treatment  of  common  illnesses  are 
available.

Accept donations of medicine only if they follow internationally recognised 
guidelines.  Do  not  use  donations  that  do  not  follow  these  guidelines  and 
dispose of them safely.

Key indicator (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » No health facility is out of stock of selected essential medicines and tracer 

products for more than one week (see guidance note 4).

Guidance notes
1.  Essential  medicines  list:  Most  countries  have  an  established  essential 
medicines  list.  This  document  should  be  reviewed,  when  necessary,  in 
consultation with the lead health authority early in the disaster response to 
determine  its  appropriateness.  Occasionally,  alterations  to  essential  medi-
cines lists may be necessary, e.g. if there is evidence of resistance to recom-
mended antimicrobials. If an updated list does not already exist, guidelines 
established by WHO should be followed, e.g. the WHO Model Lists of Essen-
tial Medicines. The use of standard pre-packaged kits should be limited to 
the early phases of a disaster.

2.  Medical equipment: Care should be taken in de(cid:196)ning a list of the necessary 
equipment available at different healthcare levels. This should also be linked 
to the required competency of the staff.

3.  Drug management: Health agencies need to establish an effective system 
of drug management. The goal of such a system is to ensure the ef(cid:196)cient, 
cost-effective  and  rational  use  of  (cid:88)uality  medicines,  storage  and  correct 
disposal  of  expired  medicines.  This  system  should  be  based  on  the  four 
key elements of the medicines management cycle: selection, procurement, 
distribution and use.

4.  Tracer  products:  These  include  a  list  of  essential  or  key  medicines  that 
are selected to regularly evaluate the functioning of the drug management 
system. The items to be selected as tracer products should be relevant to 
local public health priorities and should be available at all times at the health 
facilities. Examples include amoxicillin and paracetamol.

303

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Health systems standard 4: Health ﬁnancing

People  have  access  to  free  primary  healthcare  services  for  the 
duration of the disaster.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Identify and mobilise (cid:196)nancial resources for providing free health services at 
the point of delivery to the affected population for the duration of the disaster 
(see guidance note 1).

 » Where  user  fees  are  charged  through  the  government  system,  make 
arrangements for their abolition or temporary suspension for the duration of 
the disaster response (see guidance note 2).

 »

Provide  (cid:196)nancial  and  technical  support  to  the  health  system  to  cover  any 
(cid:196)nancial gaps created by the abolition and(cid:22)or suspension of user fees and to 
cope with the increased demand for health services (see guidance note 1).

Key indicator (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Primary healthcare services are provided to the disaster-affected population 
free of charge at all government and non-governmental organisation facilities 
for the duration of the disaster response.

Guidance notes
1.  Health  ﬁnancing:  The  cost  of  providing  essential  health  services  varies 
according to the context. Such a context includes the existing health system, 
the population affected by the disaster and the speci(cid:196)c health needs deter-
mined  by  the  disaster.  According  to  the  WHO  Commission  on  Macro-
economics  and  Health,  providing  a  minimum  package  of  essential  health 
services would re(cid:88)uire expenditure of at least (cid:60)S(cid:11) (cid:27)(cid:23)(cid:22)person(cid:22)year in low-
income countries (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31) (cid:196)gures(cid:16). Providing health services in disaster settings 
is likely to incur higher costs than in stable settings.

2.  User fees refer to direct payments by bene(cid:196)ciaries at the point of service 
delivery. User fees impede access to healthcare and result in poor and vulner-
able people not always seeking appropriate healthcare when it is needed. 
A  basic  humanitarian  principle  is  that  services  and  goods  provided  by  aid 
agencies  should  be  free  of  charge  to  recipients.  In  contexts  where  this  is 
not possible, providing members of the affected population with cash and(cid:22)or 
vouchers can be considered to enable access to health services (see Food 
security – cash and voucher transfers standard 1 on page 200). Removal of 

304

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

user  fees  must  be  accompanied  by  other  measures  to  support  the  health 
system to compensate for the revenue forgone and increase use (e.g. paying 
incentives  to  health  staff,  providing  additional  supplies  of  medicine(cid:16).  The 
accessibility and quality of services must be monitored after the removal of 
user fees.

Health systems standard 5: Health information management

The design and delivery of health services are guided by the collection, 
analysis, interpretation and utilisation of relevant public health data.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » (cid:43)ecide on the use of the existing health information system (cid:15)HIS(cid:16), its adapta-

tion or the use of alternative HIS (see guidance note 1).

 » When relevant, conduct assessments and surveys to collect information that 
is  not  available  from  the  HIS  and  is  critical  for  deciding  on  priority  health 
services (see guidance note 2).

 » (cid:43)evelop and(cid:22)or utilise standardised case de(cid:196)nitions for all reportable diseases 

and health conditions and ensure they are used by all agencies.

 » Design  surveillance  and  early  warning  (EWARN)  systems  for  detection  of 
outbreaks as a component of the HIS and build upon existing HIS whenever 
possible (see Essential health services – control of communicable diseases 
standard  (cid:26)  on  page  (cid:26)1(cid:29)  and  (cid:40)ppendix  (cid:25):  Sample  weekly  surveillance 
reporting forms).

 »

 »

Identify and report priority diseases and health conditions through the HIS.

(cid:40)ll  responding  agencies  agree  upon  and  use  a  common  (cid:196)gure,  such  as 
population (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 » Health facilities and agencies submit surveillance and other HIS data to the 
lead  agency  on  a  regular  basis.  The  frequency  of  these  reports  will  vary 
according to the context and to the type of data, e.g. daily, weekly, monthly.

 » (cid:60)se supplementary data consistently from other relevant sources, such as 
surveys,  to  interpret  surveillance  data  and  to  guide  decision-making  (cid:15)see 
guidance note 2).

 »

Take adequate precautions for the protection of data to guarantee the rights 
and safety of individuals and/or populations (see guidance note 4).

305

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

All  health  facilities  and  agencies  regularly  provide  a  HIS  report  within  48 
hours of the end of the reporting period to the lead agency.

 »

 »

All  health  facilities  and  agencies  report  cases  of  epidemic-prone  diseases 
within 24 hours of onset of illness (see Essential health services – control of 
communicable diseases standard (cid:26) on page (cid:26)1(cid:29)(cid:16).

The  lead  agency  produces  a  regular  overall  health  information  report, 
including  analysis  and  interpretation  of  epidemiological  data,  as  well  as  a 
report on the coverage and utilisation of the health services.

Guidance notes
1.  Health information system: A surveillance system should build upon the 
existing  HIS  whenever  possible.  In  some  disasters,  a  new  or  parallel  HIS 
may be required. This is determined by an assessment of the performance 
and adequacy of the existing HIS and the information needs for the current 
disaster. (cid:43)uring the disaster response, health data should include, but not be 
limited to, the following:

 - deaths recorded by health facilities including under-(cid:28) deaths
 - proportional mortality
 - cause-speci(cid:196)c mortality
 - incidence rates for most common morbidities
 - proportional morbidity
 - health facility utilisation rate
 - number of consultations/clinician/day.

2.  Sources of data: The interpretation and use of health facility data need to 
take into account the source of the information and its limitations. The use of 
supplemental data for decision-making is essential in a comprehensive HIS, 
for  example  estimates  of  prevalence  of  diseases  or  information  on  health-
seeking  behaviour.  Other  sources  of  data  that  may  improve  the  analysis 
include population-based surveys, laboratory reports and (cid:88)uality of service 
measurements. Surveys and assessment must follow internationally recog-
nised (cid:88)uality criteria and use standardised tools and protocols and, where 
possible, be submitted to a peer-review process.

3.  Disaggregation of data: (cid:43)ata should be disaggregated by sex, age, vulner-
ability of particular individuals, affected and host populations, and context 
(e.g. camp versus non-camp situation) as far as is practical to guide decision-
making. (cid:43)etailed disaggregation may be dif(cid:196)cult during the early stages of an 
emergency. However, mortality and morbidity data should at least be disag-
gregated for children under (cid:28) years old. (cid:40)s time and conditions allow, more 

306

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

detailed disaggregation should be sought to help detect potential inequalities 
and vulnerable people (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1(cid:16).

4.  Conﬁdentiality: Adequate precautions should be taken to protect the safety 
of the individual, as well as the data itself. Staff members should never share 
patient  information  with  anyone  not  directly  involved  in  the  patient’s  care 
without the patient’s permission. Special consideration should be given to 
persons with intellectual, mental or sensory impairment, which may compro-
mise their ability to give informed consent. Data that relate to injury caused 
by torture or other human rights violations including sexual assault must be 
treated with the utmost care. Consideration may be given to passing on this 
information  to  appropriate  actors  or  institutions  if  the  individual  gives  their 
informed consent (see Health systems standard 1 on page 296 and Protec-
tion Principle 1, guidance notes 7(cid:182)1(cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:16).

See  (cid:40)ppendix  (cid:25)  for  sample  mortality,  EW(cid:40)RN  and  morbidity  monitoring 
forms. See (cid:40)ppendix (cid:26) for formulas for calculating key health indicators.

Health systems standard 6: Leadership and coordination

People have access to health services that are coordinated across 
agencies and sectors to achieve maximum impact.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Ensure that representatives of the Ministry of Health lead or at the very least 
are closely involved in the health sector coordination, whenever possible.

 » When the MOH lacks the necessary capacity or willingness to provide lead-
ership in the response, an alternate agency with the re(cid:88)uisite capacity must 
be  identi(cid:196)ed  to  take  the  lead  in  health  sector  coordination  (cid:15)see  guidance 
notes 1–2).

 » Hold regular health coordination meetings for local and external partners at 
central, sub-national and (cid:196)eld levels within the health sector, and between 
health and other sectors and appropriate cross-cutting theme groups (see 
guidance note (cid:26) and Core Standard (cid:25) on page (cid:28)(cid:31)(cid:16).

 » Clarify  and  document  the  speci(cid:196)c  responsibilities  and  capacities  of  each 
health  agency  to  ensure  optimal  coverage  of  the  population  (see  guidance 
note 1).

 »

Establish  working  groups  within  the  health  coordination  mechanism 
whenever a particular situation may require it (e.g. outbreak preparedness 
and response, reproductive health(cid:16).

307

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

Regularly produce and disseminate updates and health sector bulletins.

Key indicator (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

The lead agency has developed a health sector response strategy document 
to prioritise interventions and de(cid:196)ne the role of the lead and partner agencies 
at the onset of emergency response (see guidance note 2).

Guidance notes
1.  Lead  health  agency:  The  Ministry  of  Health  should  be  the  lead  health 
agency and be responsible for leading the health sector response. In some 
situations, the MOH may lack capacity or willingness to assume the leader-
ship role in an effective and impartial manner. In this situation, WHO, as a lead 
agency for the global health cluster, will generally take on this responsibility. 
On occasion, when both the MOH and WHO lack capacity, another agency 
may  be  required  to  coordinate  activities.  The  lead  health  agency  should 
ensure that responding health agencies coordinate with local health authori-
ties and that they support the capacities of local health systems (see Core 
Standard (cid:25) on page (cid:28)(cid:31)(cid:16).

2.  Health sector strategy: An important responsibility of the lead health agency 
is to develop an overall strategy for the emergency response within the health 
sector. Ideally, a document should be produced that speci(cid:196)es health sector 
priorities and objectives and outlines the strategies for achieving them. This 
document  should  be  developed  after  consultation  with  relevant  agencies 
and community representatives ensuring as inclusive a process as possible.

3.  Coordination meetings should be action-oriented and provide a forum in 
which information is shared, priorities are identi(cid:196)ed and monitored, common 
health  strategies  are  developed  and  adapted,  speci(cid:196)c  tasks  are  allocated 
and standardised protocols and interventions are agreed upon. They should 
be used to ensure that all health partners use common denominators and 
other relevant (cid:196)gures, tools, guidelines and standards, whenever possible. 
Meetings should be held more frequently at the beginning of the disaster.

308

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

2. Essential health services

Essential  health  services  are  preventive  and  curative  health  services  that  are 
appropriate to address the health needs of populations affected by disasters. They 
include interventions that are most effective in preventing and reducing excess 
morbidity  and  mortality  from  communicable  and  non-communicable  diseases, 
the conse(cid:88)uences of con(cid:197)ict and mass casualty events. (cid:43)uring disasters, death 
rates can be extremely high and identi(cid:196)cation of the major causes of morbidity and 
mortality is important for the design of appropriate essential health services. This 
part of the health chapter outlines the essential health service standards catego-
rised under six sections: control of communicable diseases; child health; sexual 
and reproductive health; injury; mental health; and non-communicable diseases.

Essential health services standard 1: Prioritising  
health services

People have access to health services that are prioritised to address 
the main causes of excess mortality and morbidity.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Collect  and  analyse  data  on  health  problems  and  risks  with  the  aim  of 
targeting the major causes of excess mortality and morbidity, in coordination 
with local health authorities (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:26) on page (cid:29)1(cid:16).

 »

 »

 »

 »

Identify vulnerable people (cid:15)e.g. women, children, older people, persons with 
disabilities, etc.(cid:16) who may be at particular risk (cid:15)see Protection Principle (cid:25) on 
page (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16).

Prioritise and implement health services that are appropriate, feasible and 
effective to reduce excess morbidity and mortality, in coordination with local 
health authorities (see guidance note 1).

Identify barriers that impede access to prioritised health services and estab-
lish practical solutions to address them (see guidance note 2).

Implement priority health services in coordination with all other sectors and/
or clusters and cross-cutting themes (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:25) on page (cid:28)(cid:31)(cid:16).

309

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

The  crude  mortality  rate  (cid:15)CMR(cid:16)  is  maintained  at,  or  reduced  to,  less  than 
double the baseline rate documented for the population prior to the disaster 
(cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

The under-(cid:28) mortality rate (cid:15)(cid:60)(cid:28)MR(cid:16) is maintained at, or reduced to, less than 
double the baseline rate documented for the population prior to the disaster 
(cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Priority health services  are  essential  health  services  that  are  effective  in 
addressing the major causes of excess mortality and morbidity. They vary 
according to the context, including the type of disaster and its impact. (cid:40)s 
far  as  possible,  priority  health  services  should  be  based  on  the  principle 
of evidence-based practice and have a demonstrated public health bene(cid:196)t. 
Once mortality rates have declined to near-baseline levels, a more compre-
hensive  range  of  health  services  can  be  introduced  over  time  (see  Core 
Standard (cid:27) on page (cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:16).

2.  Access to health services should be based on the principles of equity and 
impartiality, ensuring e(cid:88)ual access according to need without any discrimi-
nation.  In  practice,  the  location  and  staf(cid:196)ng  of  health  services  should  be 
organised to ensure optimal access and coverage. The particular needs of 
vulnerable  people  should  be  addressed  when  designing  health  services. 
(cid:41)arriers to access may be physical, (cid:196)nancial, behavioural and(cid:22)or cultural, as 
well as communication barriers. Identifying and overcoming such barriers to 
the access of prioritised health services are essential (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:26) 
on page (cid:29)1 and Protection Principle (cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16).

3.  Crude mortality rate and under-5 mortality rate: The CMR is the most 
useful health indicator to monitor and evaluate the severity of an emergency 
situation.  (cid:40)  doubling  or  more  of  the  baseline  CMR  indicates  a  signi(cid:196)cant 
public health emergency, re(cid:88)uiring immediate response. When the baseline 
rate is unknown or of doubtful validity, agencies should aim to maintain the 
CMR at least below 1.(cid:23)(cid:22)1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:22)day.

The (cid:60)(cid:28)MR is a more sensitive indicator than CMR. When the baseline rate is 
unknown or of doubtful validity, agencies should aim to maintain the (cid:60)(cid:28)MR 
at least below (cid:25).(cid:23)(cid:22)1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:22)day (cid:15)see (cid:40)ppendix (cid:26): Formulas for calculating key 
health indicators).

310

 Region

Sub-Saharan Africa

Middle East and  
North Africa

South Asia

East (cid:40)sia and Paci(cid:196)c

Latin America and 
Caribbean

Central and Eastern 
European region(cid:22)CIS(cid:17)  
and Baltic States

Industrialised countries

Developing countries

0.41

0.16

0.22

0.19

0.16

(cid:23).(cid:26)(cid:26)

(cid:23).(cid:25)(cid:28)

0.22

0.8

(cid:23).(cid:26)

0.4

0.4

(cid:23).(cid:26)

0.7

(cid:23).(cid:28)

0.4

0.7

(cid:23).(cid:28)

1.07

0.27

0.46

(cid:23).1(cid:28)

(cid:23).1(cid:28)

0.14

(cid:23).(cid:23)(cid:26)

0.44

0.82

0.40

2.1

(cid:23).(cid:28)

0.9

(cid:23).(cid:26)

(cid:23).(cid:26)

(cid:23).(cid:26)

0.1

0.9

1.7

0.8

Baseline reference mortality data by region

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

CMR 
(deaths/ 
10,000/
day)

CMR 
emergency 
threshold

U5MR 
(deaths/ 
10,000/
day)

U5MR 
emergency 
threshold

Least developed countries

(cid:23).(cid:26)(cid:26)

World

(cid:23).(cid:25)(cid:28)

* Commonwealth of Independent States 
Source: UNICEF, State of the World’s Children 2009 (data from 2007)

2.1.  Essential health services –  

control of communicable diseases

Morbidity  and  mortality  due  to  communicable  diseases  tend  to  increase  with 
disasters.  In  many  con(cid:197)ict-affected  settings,  between  (cid:29)(cid:23)  per  cent  and  9(cid:23)  per 
cent of deaths have been attributed to four major infectious causes: acute respi-
ratory infections, diarrhoea, measles and malaria where endemic. (cid:40)cute malnu-
trition exacerbates these diseases, especially in children under (cid:28) years of age. 
Outbreaks  of  communicable  diseases  are  far  less  commonly  associated  with 
acute-onset natural disasters. When outbreaks occur, they are generally asso-
ciated  with  risk  factors  such  as  population  displacement,  overcrowding,  inad-
e(cid:88)uate shelter, insuf(cid:196)cient and unsafe water and inade(cid:88)uate sanitation.

311

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Essential health services – control of communicable diseases 
standard 1: Communicable disease prevention

People have access to information and services that are designed 
to prevent the communicable diseases that contribute most signi(cid:196)-
cantly to excess morbidity and mortality.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Develop  and  implement  general  prevention  measures  in  coordination  with 

relevant sectors (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

Implement  appropriate  vector  control  methods  for  malaria,  dengue  and 
other vector-borne diseases depending on local epidemiology (see guidance 
notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:16).

Implement  disease-speci(cid:196)c  prevention  measures,  e.g.  mass  vaccination 
against  measles  as  indicated  (see  Essential  health  services  –  child  health 
standard 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:25)1(cid:16).

Key indicator (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Incidence of major communicable diseases relevant to the context are stable 
(not increasing).

Guidance notes
1.  General prevention measures: This includes good site planning, provision 
of clean water and proper sanitation, access to hygiene facilities, vaccination 
against speci(cid:196)c diseases, suf(cid:196)cient and safe food supply, personal protec-
tion and vector control, and community health education and social mobili-
sation. Most of these intervention should be developed in coordination with 
other sectors, including:

 - shelter (cid:182) ade(cid:88)uate numbers of shelters and suf(cid:196)cient space between them, 
ade(cid:88)uately ventilated, insect-proofed and sited away from standing water, 
close enough to water and sanitation facilities (see Shelter and settlement 
standards  1(cid:182)(cid:26)  on  pages  (cid:25)(cid:27)9(cid:182)(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:31)  and  Non-food  items  standard  (cid:25)  on 
page 271)

 - water, sanitation, hygiene (cid:182) suf(cid:196)cient (cid:88)uantities of safe water and ade(cid:88)uate 
sanitation facilities and hygiene promotion (see Hygiene promotion stan-
dards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages 91(cid:182)9(cid:27), Water supply standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages 97(cid:182)1(cid:23)(cid:26) 
and Excreta disposal standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages 1(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:182)1(cid:23)7(cid:16)

312

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

 - environmental sanitation and safe waste management and vector control 
(cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26), Shelter and settlement standard (cid:27) on page (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:25), 
(cid:61)ector control standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages 111(cid:182)11(cid:29), Solid waste management 
standard 1 on page 117 and Drainage standard 1 on page 121)

 - food security, nutrition and food assistance (cid:182) access to ade(cid:88)uate food and 
management of malnutrition (see Infant and young child feeding standards 
1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages 1(cid:28)9(cid:182)1(cid:29)(cid:23), Management of acute malnutrition and micronu-
trient  de(cid:196)ciencies  standards  1(cid:182)(cid:26)  on  pages  1(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:182)17(cid:26)  and  Food  security 
standard 1 on page 176)

 - health  education  and  social  mobilisation  –  develop  messages  to  ensure 

the effective implementation of the above preventive measures.

2.  Malaria prevention: Implement malaria prevention methods according to the 
risk of infection, the phase of the emergency and mobility of the population, 
the type of shelters and behaviour of the local vector in a malaria-endemic 
region. (cid:61)ector control measures such as indoor residual spraying (cid:15)IRS(cid:16) with 
an effective insecticide and the distribution of long-lasting insecticide-treated 
nets (LLINs) should be guided by entomological assessments and expertise. 
To be effective as a community control measure, IRS re(cid:88)uires coverage of 
at least 80 per cent of dwellings. LLINs provide long-term personal protec-
tion and are the standard net of choice. Distributions of untreated nets are 
not recommended (cid:15)see Non-food items standard (cid:25) on page (cid:25)71 and (cid:61)ector 
control standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages 111(cid:182)11(cid:29)(cid:16).

Prioritisation for LLIN distribution to risk groups depends on the phase of the 
disaster and level of malaria transmission. In the early phase of disasters in 
areas of high to moderate malaria transmission, hospital patients, severely 
malnourished people and members of their households, pregnant women 
and  children  under  2  years  of  age  should  be  prioritised.  The  next  priority 
is  those  enrolled  in  supplementary  feeding  programmes,  children  under 
(cid:28)  years  of  age  and  households  of  pregnant  women  and  children  under  (cid:25) 
years of age. Eventually, the entire population at risk would re(cid:88)uire protec-
tion  with  LLINs.  In  the  early  phase  of  disasters  in  low  transmission  areas, 
LLINs should be used in clinical settings (cid:15)for example, residential therapeutic 
feeding centres and hospitals).

3.  Dengue prevention: (cid:61)ector (cid:15)larval and adult(cid:16) control is the main method of 
dengue prevention. Dengue vector control should be guided by surveillance 
data on the distribution of human cases and vector density. The most produc-
tive breeding sites, which vary from place to place, need to be targeted. In 
urban areas, Aedes mosquitoes breed in water storage containers and other 
arti(cid:196)cial water accumulation sites (cid:15)plastic cups, used tyres, broken bottles, 
(cid:197)ower  pots,  etc.(cid:16).  Periodic  draining  and  removal  of  containers  is  the  most 
effective  way  of  reducing  the  number  of  breeding  grounds.  Water  stored 

313

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

in  houses  should  be  covered  at  all  times  and  the  containers  cleaned  and 
scrubbed weekly. The disaster-affected population should be provided with 
proper water storage containers with lids. Treatment of containers with an 
approved larvicide is also effective in eliminating larvae. Spraying with insecti-
cide is effective in reducing the number of adult mosquitoes. Personal protec-
tion measures should also be promoted (see Non-food items standard 2 on 
page (cid:25)71 and (cid:61)ector control standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages 111(cid:182)11(cid:29)(cid:16).

Essential health services – control of communicable  
diseases standard 2: Communicable disease diagnosis and 
case management

People have access to effective diagnosis and treatment for those 
infectious diseases that contribute most signi(cid:196)cantly to preventable 
excess morbidity and mortality.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Develop  public  health  education  messages  to  encourage  people  to  seek 

care early for fever, cough, diarrhoea, etc.

 »

 »

Provide healthcare at all (cid:196)rst-level health facilities based upon standard case 
management protocol, or the Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses 
(IMCI) and Integrated Management of Adult Illness (IMAI) where implemented 
and referral care for management of severe illness (see guidance note 1).

Implement triage, diagnostic and case management protocols for early treat-
ment of conditions such as pneumonia, malaria, diarrhoea, measles, menin-
gitis,  malnutrition  and  dengue  and  train  staff  on  treatment  protocols  (cid:15)see 
guidance notes (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:26) and Essential health services (cid:182) child health standard (cid:25) 
on page (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:16).

 »

Introduce tuberculosis control programmes only after recognised criteria are 
met (see guidance note 4).

Key indicator (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Standardised case management protocols for the diagnosis and treatment 
of common infectious diseases are readily available and consistently used 
(cid:15)see guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:26) and Health systems standard 1 on page (cid:25)9(cid:29)(cid:16).

314

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Guidance notes
1. 

Illnesses  and 

Integrated  Management  of  Childhood 
Integrated 
Management of Adult Illness: Mortality from communicable diseases can 
be reduced by early and accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment. Use 
of IMCI and IM(cid:40)I where implemented, or other national diagnostic algorithms, 
are important to triage and classify disease according to type and severity 
and to aid the administering of appropriate treatments. Danger signs are indi-
cations for referral to an inpatient facility. Standard case management proto-
cols allow for appropriate diagnosis and rational drug use (see also Essential 
health services (cid:182) child health standard (cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:16).

2.  Pneumonia: The key to reducing mortality from pneumonia is prompt admin-
istration of oral antibiotics, such as amoxicillin, according to national proto-
cols. Severe pneumonia will require hospitalisation and parenteral therapy.

3.  Malaria:  Access  to  prompt  and  effective  treatment  is  key  for  successful 
malaria  control.  In  malaria-endemic  regions,  establish  a  protocol  for  early 
(less  than  24  hours)  diagnosis  of  fever  and  treatment  with  highly  effective 
(cid:196)rst-line drugs. (cid:40)rtemisinin-based combination therapies (cid:15)(cid:40)CTs(cid:16) are the norm 
for  treatment  of  falciparum  malaria.  Drug  choice  should  be  determined  in 
consultation  with  the  lead  health  agency  and  the  national  malaria  control 
programme. Consider drug quality when sourcing supplies. Malaria should 
preferably be diagnosed by laboratory test (cid:15)rapid diagnostic test, microscopy(cid:16) 
before treatment is started. However, treatment of clinical malaria should not 
be delayed if laboratory diagnosis is unavailable.

4.  Tuberculosis (TB) control: Poorly implemented TB control programmes can 
potentially do more harm than good, by prolonging infectivity and by contrib-
uting to the spread of multidrug-resistant bacilli. While the management of 
individual patients with T(cid:41) may be possible during disasters, a comprehen-
sive  programme  of  TB  control  should  only  be  implemented  if  recognised 
criteria are met. These criteria include commitment and resources of agency, 
an assured stability of the population for at least 1(cid:25)(cid:182)1(cid:28) months and that a 
good (cid:88)uality programme can be delivered. When implemented, T(cid:41) control 
programmes should be integrated with the national country programme and 
follow the (cid:43)irectly-Observed Therapy, Short-course strategy.

In  the  acute  phase  of  an  emergency,  the  potential  interruption  of  all  treat-
ments for all chronic diseases including TB and loss of patient follow-up are 
likely to be a signi(cid:196)cant problem. Strong collaboration must be established 
between  the  emergency  health  workers  and  the  established  national  TB 
programme services. This will help ensure that people who were already on 
treatment  prior  to  the  disaster  continue  with  their  treatment  (see  Essential 
health services (cid:182) non-communicable diseases standard 1 on page (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:16).

315

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Essential health services – control of communicable diseases 
standard 3: Outbreak detection and response

Outbreaks are prepared for, detected, investigated and controlled in 
a timely and effective manner.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)

Detection

 »

 »

 »

Establish a disease EWARN (early warning) surveillance and response system 
based  on  a  comprehensive  risk  assessment  of  communicable  diseases, 
as part of the broader health information system (see guidance note 1 and 
Health systems standard (cid:28) on page (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16).

Train healthcare staff and Community Health Workers to detect and report 
potential outbreaks.

Provide populations with simple information on symptoms of epidemic-prone 
diseases and where to go for help.

Preparedness

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

Prepare an outbreak investigation and response plan (see guidance note 2).

Ensure that protocols for the investigation and control of common outbreaks, 
including  relevant  treatment  protocols,  are  available  and  distributed  to 
relevant staff.

Ensure  that  reserve  stocks  of  essential  material  are  available  for  priority 
diseases  or  can  be  procured  rapidly  from  a  pre-identi(cid:196)ed  source  (cid:15)see 
guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Identify sites for isolation and treatment of infectious patients in advance, e.g. 
cholera treatment centres.

Identify  a  laboratory,  whether  locally,  regionally,  nationally  or  in  another 
country, that can provide con(cid:196)rmation of outbreaks (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:27)(cid:16).

Ensure that sampling materials and transport media are available on-site for 
the infectious agents most likely to cause a sudden outbreak (see guidance 
note (cid:28)(cid:16).

316

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Control

 » (cid:43)escribe the outbreak according to time, place and person, leading to the 
identi(cid:196)cation  of  high-risk  individuals  and  adapted  control  measures  (cid:15)see 
guidance notes 6–8).

 »

Implement appropriate control measures that are speci(cid:196)c to the disease and 
context (see guidance note 9).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

A written outbreak investigation and response plan is available or developed 
at the beginning of disaster response.

 » Health  agencies  report  suspected  outbreaks  to  the  next  appropriate  level 

within the health system within 24 hours of detection.

 »

The lead health agency initiates investigation of reported cases of epidemic-
prone diseases within (cid:27)(cid:31) hours of noti(cid:196)cation.

 » Case fatality rates (CFRs) are maintained below acceptable levels:

 - cholera – 1 per cent or lower
 - Shigella dysentery – 1 per cent or lower
 - typhoid – 1 per cent or lower
 - meningococcal meningitis (cid:182) varies, (cid:28)(cid:182)1(cid:28) per cent
 - malaria (cid:182) varies, aim for (cid:35)(cid:28) per cent in severely ill malaria patients
 - measles (cid:182) varies, (cid:25)(cid:182)(cid:25)1 per cent reported in con(cid:197)ict-affected settings, aim 

for (cid:35)(cid:28) per cent (cid:15)see guidance note 1(cid:23)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Early warning system for outbreak detection: The key elements of such 

a system will include:

 - a network of implementing partners
 - implementation at all health facilities and at community level if possible
 - a comprehensive risk assessment of all potential epidemic-prone diseases
 - identi(cid:196)cation,  based  on  risk  assessment,  of  a  small  number  of  priority 
conditions (10–12) for weekly surveillance and a select number of diseases 
for  immediate  ‘alert’  reporting  (see  Appendix  2:  Sample  weekly  surveil-
lance reporting forms)

 - clear case de(cid:196)nitions for each disease or condition on the standard surveil-

lance form

 - alert  thresholds  de(cid:196)ned  for  each  priority  disease  or  condition  to  initiate 

investigation

317

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 - communications  to  ensure  rapid  noti(cid:196)cation  of  formal  or  informal  alerts 

(cid:15)rumours, media reports, etc.(cid:16) to relevant health authorities
 - a system for recording and responding to immediate alerts
 - data  reporting,  entry  into  standard  database  and  analysis  on  a  weekly 

basis

 - feedback  of  weekly  surveillance  and  immediate  alert  information  to  all 

partners

 - regular  supervision  to  ensure  data  quality  as  well  as  timeliness  and 

completeness of reporting

 - standard case investigation protocols and forms
 - standard  procedures  for  information-sharing  and  initiation  of  outbreak 

response.

2.  Outbreak investigation and control plan: This must be prepared with full 

participation of all stakeholders. The following issues should be addressed:

 - the criteria under which an outbreak control team is to be convened
 - the composition of the outbreak control team
 - the speci(cid:196)c roles and responsibilities of organisations and positions in the 

team

 - the  arrangements  for  consulting  and  information-sharing  at  local  and 

national levels

 - the  resources  and  facilities  available  to  investigate  and  respond  to 

outbreaks

 - the list of essential medicines, supplies and diagnostics needed.

3.  Reserve stocks: On-site reserves should include material to use in response 
to  likely  outbreaks.  A  pre-packaged  diarrhoeal  disease  or  cholera  kit  may 
be  needed  in  some  circumstances.  It  may  not  be  practical  to  keep  some 
stocks on-site, such as meningococcal vaccine. For these items, procedures 
for  prompt  procurement,  shipment  and  storage  should  be  determined  in 
advance so that they can be rapidly obtained.

4.  Reference  laboratories:  Laboratory  testing  is  useful  for  con(cid:196)rming  the 
diagnosis  during  a  suspected  outbreak  for  which  mass  immunisation  may 
be indicated (e.g. meningococcal meningitis) or where culture and antibiotic 
sensitivity testing may in(cid:197)uence case management decisions (cid:15)e.g. shigellosis(cid:16). 
(cid:40)  reference  laboratory  should  also  be  identi(cid:196)ed  either  regionally  or 
internationally that can assist with more sophisticated testing, e.g. serological 
diagnosis  of  measles,  yellow  fever,  dengue  fever  and  viral  haemorrhagic 
fevers.

5.  Transport media and rapid tests: Sampling materials (e.g. rectal swabs) 
and transport media (cid:15)e.g. Cary-(cid:41)lair media for cholera, Shigella, E. coli and 
Salmonella) and cold chain material for transport should be available on-site 
or readily accessible. In addition, several rapid tests are available that can be 

318

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

useful in screening for communicable diseases in the (cid:196)eld, including malaria 
and meningitis.

6.  Outbreak investigation: The ten key steps in outbreak investigation are:

1.  establish the existence of an outbreak
(cid:25).  con(cid:196)rm the diagnosis
(cid:26).  de(cid:196)ne a case
4.  count cases
(cid:28).  perform descriptive epidemiology (cid:15)time, person, place(cid:16)
6.  determine who is at risk
7.  develop hypotheses explaining exposure and disease
8.  evaluate hypotheses
9.  communicate (cid:196)ndings
10.  implement control measures.

These steps do not need to be implemented in any strict order and control 
measures should be implemented as soon as possible.

7.  Conﬁrmation of the existence of an outbreak: It is not always straightfor-
ward to determine whether an outbreak is present, and clear de(cid:196)nitions of 
outbreak thresholds do not exist for all diseases. Nevertheless, thresholds 
exist for the diseases listed below:

 - diseases  for  which  a  single  case  may  indicate  an  outbreak:  cholera, 

measles, yellow fever, viral haemorrhagic fevers

 - diseases for which an outbreak should be suspected when cases of, or 
deaths due to, the disease exceed the number expected for the location 
or are double the previous weekly averages; shigellosis (cid:182) in non-endemic 
regions  and  in  refugee  camps,  a  single  case  of  shigellosis  should  raise 
concern about a potential outbreak

 - malaria  (cid:182)  de(cid:196)nitions  are  situation-speci(cid:196)c;  an  increase  in  the  number 
of  cases  above  what  is  expected  for  the  time  of  year  among  a  de(cid:196)ned 
population  in  a  de(cid:196)ned  area  may  indicate  an  outbreak.  Without  historic 
data, warning signals include a considerable increase in the proportion of 
fever cases that are con(cid:196)rmed as malaria in the past two weeks and an 
increasing trend of case fatality rates over past weeks

 - meningococcal meningitis (cid:182) in the meningitis belt, for populations above 
(cid:26)(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23), 1(cid:28) cases(cid:22)1(cid:23)(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) persons(cid:22)week; however, with high outbreak risk 
(cid:15)i.e. no outbreak for (cid:26)(cid:18) years and vaccination coverage (cid:35)(cid:31)(cid:23) per cent(cid:16), this 
threshold is reduced to 1(cid:23) cases(cid:22)1(cid:23)(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) persons(cid:22)week. In populations 
of less than (cid:26)(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:196)ve cases in one week or a doubling of cases over a 
three-week period con(cid:196)rms an outbreak. In a camp, two con(cid:196)rmed cases 
in one week indicate an outbreak

319

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 - dengue – increase in fever cases in the past two weeks that show increased 
IgG levels (based on paired testing of consecutive sera-samples) of a febrile 
patient with (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:28) days illness and decreasing platelet count (cid:15)(cid:35)(cid:25)(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16).

8.  Outbreak response: (cid:50)ey components of outbreak response are coordina-
tion, case management, surveillance and epidemiology, laboratory, speci(cid:196)c 
preventive measures such as water and sanitation improvement depending 
on  disease,  risk  communication,  social  mobilisation,  media  relations  and 
information management, logistics and security.

9.  Control  measures:  Control  measures  must  be  speci(cid:196)cally  developed  to 
halt transmission of the agent causing the outbreak. Often, existing knowl-
edge about the agent can guide the design of appropriate control measures 
in speci(cid:196)c situations. In general, response activities include controlling the 
source and/or preventing exposure (e.g. through improved water source to 
prevent cholera(cid:16), interrupting transmission and(cid:22)or preventing infection (cid:15)e.g. 
through  mass  vaccination  to  prevent  measles  or  use  of  LLINs  to  prevent 
malaria)  and  modifying  host  defences  (e.g.  through  prompt  diagnosis  and 
treatment or through chemoprophylaxis(cid:16) (cid:15)see Health systems standard (cid:28) on 
page (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), Water supply standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages 97(cid:182)1(cid:23)(cid:23), Hygiene promotion 
standards 1(cid:182)(cid:25) on pages 91(cid:182)9(cid:27) and (cid:61)ector control standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages 
111–116).

10.  Case fatality rates: The acceptable CFRs for communicable diseases vary 
according  to  the  general  context,  accessibility  to  health  services  and  the 
(cid:88)uality and rapidity of case management. In general, aim to reduce CFRs to 
as low as possible. If CFRs exceed the minimum expected levels, an imme-
diate evaluation of control measures should be undertaken and corrective 
steps followed to ensure CFRs are maintained at acceptable levels.

2.2. Essential health services – child health

(cid:43)uring  emergencies,  children  are  especially  vulnerable  to  increased  rates  of 
morbidity  and  mortality.  (cid:40)ddressing  their  speci(cid:196)c  health  needs  re(cid:88)uires  child-
focused interventions. Child health interventions must include those that address 
the major causes of excess morbidity and mortality, including acute respiratory 
infections, diarrhoea, measles, malnutrition and neonatal causes.

320

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Essential health services – child health standard 1: Prevention 
of vaccine-preventable diseases

Children aged (cid:29) months to 1(cid:28) years have immunity against measles 
and access to routine Expanded Programme on Immunization (EPI) 
services once the situation is stabilised.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Make  an  estimation  of  measles  vaccination  coverage  of  children  aged  9 
months to 1(cid:28) years at the outset of the disaster response, to determine the 
risk of outbreaks (see guidance note 1).

 » When measles vaccination coverage is (cid:35)9(cid:23) per cent or unknown, conduct a 
mass measles vaccination campaign for children aged (cid:29) months to 1(cid:28) years, 
including the administration of (cid:61)itamin (cid:40) to children aged (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 months (cid:15)see 
guidance notes 1–2).

 »

 »

 »

Ensure that all infants vaccinated between 6–9 months of age receive another 
dose of measles vaccine upon reaching 9 months (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

For mobile or displaced populations, establish an ongoing system to ensure 
that  at  least  9(cid:28)  per  cent  of  newcomers  to  a  camp  or  community  aged 
between (cid:29) months and 1(cid:28) years receive vaccination against measles.

Re-establish  the  EPI  as  soon  as  conditions  permit  to  routinely  immunise 
children against measles and other vaccine-preventable diseases included 
in the national schedule (see guidance note 4).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Upon completion of measles vaccination campaign:

 - at least 9(cid:28) per cent of children aged (cid:29) months to 1(cid:28) years have received 

measles vaccination

 - at least 9(cid:28) per cent of children aged (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 months have received an appro-

priate dose of (cid:61)itamin (cid:40).

 » Once routine EPI services have been re-established, at least 9(cid:23) per cent of 
children aged 1(cid:25) months have had three doses of (cid:43)PT (cid:15)diphtheria, pertussis 
and tetanus(cid:16), which is the proxy indicator for fully immunised children.

321

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Guidance notes
1.  Measles vaccination coverage: Determine measles vaccination coverage 
in  the  affected  population  through  review  of  immunisation  coverage  data. 
(cid:41)ased on this review, determine if routine measles immunisation coverage 
has  been  (cid:153)9(cid:23)  per  cent  for  the  preceding  (cid:196)ve  years  and(cid:22)or  if  a  measles 
vaccination campaign conducted in the preceding 12 months has reached 
(cid:153)9(cid:23) per cent of children aged 9 months to (cid:28) years. If measles vaccination 
coverage is (cid:35)9(cid:23) per cent, unknown or doubts remain regarding the coverage 
estimates, the campaign should be carried out on the assumption that the 
coverage is inadequate to prevent outbreaks.

2.  Age  ranges  for  measles  vaccination:  Some  older  children  may  have 
escaped  both  previous  measles  vaccination  campaigns  and  measles 
disease. These children remain at risk of measles and can serve as a source 
of  infection  for  infants  and  young  children  who  are  at  higher  risk  of  dying 
from the disease. This is the reason for the recommendation to vaccinate up 
to the age of 1(cid:28) years. In resource-poor settings, it may not be possible to 
vaccinate all children aged (cid:29) months to 1(cid:28) years. In these settings, priority 
should be given to children aged (cid:29)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 months. (cid:40)ll children in the target age 
group  should  be  immunised  against  measles  regardless  of  their  previous 
immunisation status.

3.  Repeat measles vaccination for children aged 6–9 months: All children 
aged 6–9 months who received the measles vaccine should receive an addi-
tional dose of measles vaccine upon reaching 9 months of age, with at least 
one month between the two doses.

4.  Re-establishment of the national EPI programme: At the same time as 
the preparation of the mass vaccination campaign against measles, plans 
should begin to re-establish the EPI programme in coordination with national 
authorities. The prompt re-establishment of EPI vaccination not only protects 
children directly against diseases such as measles, diphtheria and pertussis, 
but has the added value of reducing the risk of respiratory infections.

322

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Essential health services – child health standard 2: 
Management of newborn and childhood illness

Children have access to priority health services that are designed 
to address the major causes of newborn and childhood morbidity 
and mortality.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 » Design health education messages to encourage the affected population to 
seek early care for any illness (cid:15)fever, cough, diarrhea, etc.(cid:16) in the newborn. In 
the design of health education messages, consider children who do not have 
an adult caring for them (cid:15)see Health systems standard 1, guidance note (cid:26) on 
page 298).

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

Provide  essential  newborn  care  to  all  newborns  according  to  Integrated 
Management of Pregnancy and Childbirth (IMPAC) guidelines where possible 
(see guidance note 1).

Provide  healthcare  to  children  at  (cid:196)rst-level  health  facilities  using  national 
protocol, or the IMCI guidelines where implemented, and hospital care for 
severely ill children (see guidance note 2).

Establish a standardised system of emergency assessment and triage at all 
health  facilities  providing  care  to  sick  children  to  ensure  those  with  emer-
gency signs receive immediate treatment (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Ensure that children attending health services are screened for their nutritional 
status and referred to nutritional services (see Management of acute malnu-
trition and micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies standards 1(cid:182)(cid:26) on pages 1(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:182)17(cid:26)(cid:16).

Establish  an  appropriate  case  management  protocol  for  the  treatment  of 
diphtheria and pertussis in situations where the risk of outbreaks of these 
diseases is high (see guidance note 6).

 » Make  available  essential  medicines  for  treatment  of  common  childhood 

illnesses in the appropriate dosages and formulations.

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

(cid:40)ll children under (cid:28) years old presenting with malaria have received effective anti-
malarial treatment within 24 hours of onset of their symptoms (see Essential health 
services (cid:182) control of communicable diseases standard (cid:25) on page (cid:26)1(cid:27)(cid:16).

 »

(cid:40)ll children under (cid:28) years of age presenting with diarrhoea have received both 
oral rehydration salts (cid:15)ORS(cid:16) and (cid:97)inc supplementation (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

323

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

(cid:40)ll children under (cid:28) years of age presenting with pneumonia have received 
appropriate antibiotics (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Care of the newborn: All newborns should ideally receive skilled care at birth 
(cid:15)preferably in a health facility(cid:16), be kept warm and receive early and exclusive 
breastfeeding. (cid:40)ll newborns should be assessed for any problems, particu-
larly feeding dif(cid:196)culties. (cid:40)ll sick newborns should be assessed for possible 
sepsis and local infections.

2. 

Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI): IMCI is an integrated 
approach  to  child  health  that  focuses  on  the  care  of  children  under  (cid:28)  at 
primary-care level. Where IMCI has been developed in a country, and clinical 
guidelines adapted, these guidelines should preferably be incorporated into 
the standardised protocols, and health professionals trained appropriately.

3.  Triage:  IMCI  and  referral  care  guidelines  can  be  enhanced  when  used  in 
combination with rapid triage and treatment. Triage is the sorting of patients 
into  priority  groups  according  to  their  medical  need,  the  resources  avail-
able and their chances of survival. Clinical staff involved in the care of sick 
children should be trained using Emergency Triage, (cid:40)ssessment and Treat-
ment (ETAT) guidelines to conduct rapid assessments.

4.  Management of diarrhoea: Children with diarrhoea must be treated with 
low osmolality ORS and receive zinc supplementation. Low osmolality ORS 
shortens  the  duration  of  the  diarrhoeal  episode  and  reduces  the  need  for 
intravenous (cid:197)uid.

5.  Management of pneumonia: Children with a cough should be assessed 
for fast and(cid:22)or dif(cid:196)cult breathing and chest indrawing. Those with fast and(cid:22)
or dif(cid:196)cult breathing should receive an appropriate oral antibiotic; those with 
chest indrawing should be referred to hospital.

6.  Pertussis  or  diphtheria  outbreaks:  Pertussis  outbreaks  are  common  in 
settings of population displacement. A vaccination campaign in response to a 
pertussis outbreak is usually avoided due to concerns about adverse events 
among older recipients of whole-cell DPT vaccine. However an outbreak can 
be used to address routine immunisation gaps. Case management includes 
antibiotic  treatment  of  cases  and  early  prophylactic  treatment  of  contacts 
in  households  where  there  is  an  infant  or  a  pregnant  woman.  Diphtheria 
outbreaks  are  less  common  but  always  a  threat  in  populations  with  low 
diphtheria immunity in crowded settings. Mass vaccination campaigns with 
three separate doses of vaccine have been conducted in camp settings in 
response to diphtheria outbreaks. Case management includes the adminis-
tration of both antitoxin and antibiotics.

324

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

2.3. Essential health services – sexual and 

reproductive health

(cid:40)ll individuals, including those living in disaster-affected areas, have the right to 
reproductive health (cid:15)RH(cid:16). To exercise this right, affected populations must have 
access to comprehensive RH information and services to make free and informed 
choices.  (cid:56)uality  RH  services  must  be  based  on  the  needs  of  the  affected 
population.  They  must  respect  the  religious  beliefs,  ethical  values  and  cultural 
backgrounds  of  the  community,  while  conforming  to  universally  recognised 
international human rights standards.

Essential health services – sexual and reproductive health 
standard 1: Reproductive health

People have access to the priority reproductive health services of 
the Minimum Initial Service Package (MISP) at the onset of an emer-
gency and comprehensive RH as the situation stabilises.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Identify a lead RH agency within the health sector or cluster to facilitate the 
coordination and implementation of the MISP and ensure that an RH of(cid:196)cer 
(nominated by lead RH agency) is in place and functioning within the health 
sector or cluster (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

 »

 »

Implement measures to reduce the risk of sexual violence, in coordination 
with other relevant sectors or clusters (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Ensure  services  for  clinical  management  of  sexual  violence,  including 
access to mental health and psychosocial support and legal assistance (see 
guidance note (cid:26) and Protection Principle (cid:25), guidance note 7 on page (cid:26)7(cid:16).

Establish the minimum set of HI(cid:61) prevention, treatment, care and support 
services to reduce the transmission of HI(cid:61) (cid:15)see Essential health services (cid:182) 
sexual and reproductive health standard (cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:16).

Ensure that emergency obstetric and newborn care services are made avail-
able and accessible including:

 - at health centres – skilled birth attendants and supplies for normal births 
and basic management of emergency obstetric and newborn complica-
tions; basic emergency obstetric care (cid:15)(cid:41)EmOC(cid:16) and newborn care

325

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 - at  referral  hospitals  –  skilled  medical  staff  and  supplies  for  comprehen-
sive management of obstetric and newborn complications; comprehensive 
emergency obstetric care (CEmOC) and newborn care

 - a  communication  and  transportation  system  to  manage  obstetric  and 
newborn  emergencies  is  established  and  functioning  (cid:25)(cid:27)  hours  a  day, 
seven days a week from the community to the health centre and between 
the health centre and referral hospital

(see guidance note 4).

 »

 »

 »

 »

Provide clean delivery kits to visibly pregnant women and birth attendants 
for clean home deliveries when access to a skilled health provider and health 
facility is not possible (see guidance note 4).

Inform populations about the bene(cid:196)ts and availability of clinical services for 
survivors of sexual violence and the emergency referral system for complica-
tions of pregnancy and childbirth (cid:15)see guidance notes (cid:26)(cid:182)(cid:27)(cid:16).

Ensure that common contraceptive methods are available to meet demand 
(see guidance note 2).

Plan  to  implement  comprehensive  RH  services,  integrated  into  primary 
healthcare, as soon as possible (cid:15)see guidance note 1(cid:16).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

(cid:40)ll health facilities have trained staff, suf(cid:196)cient supplies and e(cid:88)uipment for 
clinical  management  of  rape  survivor  services  based  on  national  or  WHO 
protocols.

 »

 »

 »

 »

All pregnant women in their third trimester have received clean delivery kits.

There  are  at  least  four  health  facilities  with  BEmOC  and  newborn  care/ 
(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) population.

There  is  at  least  one  health  facility  with  CEmOC  and  newborn  care/ 
(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) population.

The proportion of deliveries by caesarean section is not less than (cid:28) per cent 
or more than 1(cid:28) per cent (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:27)(cid:16).

Guidance notes
1.  Minimum  Initial  Service  Package:  The  MISP  de(cid:196)nes  those  services  that 
are most important for preventing RH-related morbidity and mortality among 
women,  men  and  adolescents  in  disaster  settings.  It  comprises  a  coordi-
nated set of priority RH services that must be implemented simultaneously to 
prevent and manage the conse(cid:88)uences of sexual violence, reduce the trans-
mission of HI(cid:61), prevent excess maternal and newborn morbidity and mortality, 

326

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

and  begin  planning  for  comprehensive  RH  services  as  soon  as  the  situa-
tion stabilises. Planning for the integration of good-quality comprehensive RH 
activities into primary healthcare at the onset of an emergency is essential to 
ensuring a continuum of care. Comprehensive RH care involves upgrading 
existing services, adding missing services and enhancing service (cid:88)uality.

2.  RH supplies: Supplies for the MISP must be ordered, distributed and stored 
to avoid delay in getting these essential products to the population. The Inter-
agency  Emergency  Health  (cid:50)it  includes  a  limited  (cid:88)uantity  of  medicines  for 
patient  post-exposure  prophylaxis,  magnesium  sulphate  and  instruments 
and medicines for midwifery care, but not all supplies re(cid:88)uired for the MISP. 
The  Interagency  Reproductive  Health  (cid:50)its,  developed  by  the  Interagency 
Working Group on RH in crises, contain medicines and supplies for a three-
month period.

3.  Sexual violence: All actors in disaster response must be aware of the risk of 
sexual violence including sexual exploitation and abuse by humanitarians, and 
must work to prevent and respond to it. Aggregate information on reported 
incidents must be safely and ethically compiled and shared to inform preven-
tion and response efforts. Incidence of sexual violence should be monitored. 
Measures for assisting survivors must be in place in all primary-level health 
facilities and include skilled staff to provide clinical management that encom-
passes  emergency  contraception,  post-exposure  prophylaxis  to  prevent 
HI(cid:61), presumptive treatment of sexually transmitted infections (cid:15)STIs(cid:16), wound 
care, tetanus prevention and hepatitis (cid:41) prevention. The use of emergency 
contraception  is  a  personal  choice  that  can  only  be  made  by  the  women 
themselves. Women should be offered unbiased counselling so as to reach 
an informed decision. Survivors of sexual violence should be supported to 
seek and be referred for clinical care and have access to mental health and 
psychosocial support.

(cid:40)t the survivor(cid:187)s re(cid:88)uest, protection staff should provide protection and legal 
support. All examination and treatment should be done only with informed 
consent of the survivor. Con(cid:196)dentiality is essential at all stages (cid:15)see Health 
systems standard (cid:28), guidance note (cid:27) on page (cid:26)(cid:23)7 and Protection Principle 
1, guidance notes 7(cid:182)1(cid:25) on page (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:16).

4.  Emergency  obstetric  and  newborn  care:  Approximately  4  per  cent  of 
the disaster-affected population will be pregnant women. (cid:40)pproximately 1(cid:28) 
per cent of all pregnant women will experience an unpredictable obstetric 
complication  during  pregnancy  or  at  the  time  of  delivery  that  will  require 
emergency  obstetric  care  and  (cid:28)(cid:182)1(cid:28)  per  cent  of  all  deliveries  will  re(cid:88)uire 
surgery,  such  as  caesarean  section.  In  order  to  prevent  maternal  and 
newborn mortality and morbidity resulting from complications, skilled birth 
attendance at all births, (cid:41)EmOC and neonatal resuscitation should be avail-

327

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

able at all primary healthcare facilities. BEmOC functions include parenteral 
antibiotics, parenteral uterotonic drugs (cid:15)oxytocin(cid:16), parenteral anticonvulsant 
drugs (cid:15)magnesium sulfate(cid:16), manual removal of retained products of concep-
tion  using  appropriate  technology,  manual  removal  of  placenta,  assisted 
vaginal  delivery  (vacuum  or  forceps  delivery)  and  maternal  and  newborn 
resuscitation. CEmOC functions include all of the interventions in BEmOC 
as  well  as  surgery  under  general  anaesthesia  (cid:15)caesarean  delivery,  lapa-
rotomy) and rational and safe blood transfusion.

The  referral  system  should  ensure  that  women  or  newborns  are  referred 
and have the means to travel to and from a primary healthcare facility with 
(cid:41)EmOC  and  newborn  care,  and  to  a  hospital  with  CEmOC  and  newborn 
care services.

Essential health services – sexual and reproductive health 
standard 2: HIV and AIDS

People  have  access  to  the  minimum  set  of  HI(cid:61)  prevention,  treat-
ment, care and support services during disasters.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Establish standard precautions and safe procedures for waste disposal within 
all healthcare settings (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:25) and Health systems standard 1, 
guidance notes 1(cid:23)(cid:182)11 on pages (cid:25)99(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16).

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

Establish and follow safe blood supply and rational use of blood transfusion 
(cid:15)see guidance note (cid:25) and Health systems standard 1, guidance note (cid:28) on 
page 298).

Establish access to good-(cid:88)uality free male and female condoms, including 
information on proper condom use.

Ensure  that  health  facilities  provide  syndromic  management  to  all  patients 
presenting with symptoms of a sexually transmitted infection.

Ensure that post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) services are provided to indi-
viduals  within  7(cid:25)  hours  of  the  incident  of  potential  exposure  to  HI(cid:61)  (cid:15)see 
guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Provide information in accessible formats and education on HI(cid:61) prevention to 
both the general public and high-risk groups (e.g. sex workers).

Ensure  prevention  of  mother-to-child  transmission  (cid:15)PMTCT(cid:16)  of  HI(cid:61)  by 
ensuring access to contraceptives, clean and safe child deliveries (cid:15)including 

328

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

emergency obstetric care(cid:16) and provision of anti-retroviral (cid:15)(cid:40)R(cid:61)(cid:16) drugs (cid:15)see 
guidance note 4).

Provide treatment, care and support for infants born from mothers known 
to be HI(cid:61) positive, including guidance and counselling on infant feeding (cid:15)see 
Infant and young child feeding standard 2 on page 160).

Ensure  that  people  living  with  HI(cid:61)  (cid:15)PLHI(cid:61)(cid:16)  receive  healthcare  including 
co-trimoxa(cid:97)ole prophylaxis for HI(cid:61)-related infections.

Ensure  that  people  who  were  previously  on  anti-retroviral  therapy  (ART) 
continue to receive treatment (see guidance note 4).

Establish links between HI(cid:61) and tuberculosis programmes where they exist.

Ensure  that  people  at  higher  risk  of  exposure  to  HI(cid:61)  have  access  to  HI(cid:61) 
prevention interventions for sexual transmission of HI(cid:61) and access to clean 
injecting  equipment  for  known  injecting  drug  users  where  these  services 
already exist.

 »

Initiate plans to broaden the range of HI(cid:61) control services in the post-disaster 
phase (see guidance note 1).

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

People most at risk of exposure to HI(cid:61) are targeted with a HI(cid:61) prevention 
programme.

 »

 »

 »

 »

Pregnant  women  known  to  be  HI(cid:61)  positive  have  received  (cid:40)R(cid:61)  drugs  for 
PMTCT.

100 per cent of transfused blood is screened for transfusion-transmissible 
infections including HI(cid:61).

Individuals potentially exposed to HI(cid:61) (cid:15)occupational exposure in healthcare 
settings and non-occupational exposure) have received PEP within 72 hours 
of an incident.

All  primary  healthcare  facilities  have  antimicrobials  to  provide  syndromic 
management to patients presenting with symptoms of an STI.

Guidance notes
1.  HIV control: The minimum set of HI(cid:61) prevention, treatment, care and support 
described in the key actions for this standard is comprised of actions that the 
health sector must take to prevent HI(cid:61) transmission and to provide care and 
support to PLHI(cid:61). They should be implemented during the early stages of 
any disaster response.

329

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

2.  Prevention  of  HIV  transmission  in  healthcare  settings:  The  preven-
tion  of  transmission  of  HI(cid:61)  in  healthcare  settings  (cid:15)e.g.  hospitals,  health-
care clinics, vaccination campaigns(cid:16) is a priority during the early stages of 
disaster response. Essential actions are ensuring the application of standard 
precautions, establishing safe and rational blood transfusion practices and 
the  correct  disposal  of  healthcare  waste  (cid:15)see  Health  systems  standard  1, 
guidance notes (cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:182)11 on pages (cid:25)9(cid:31)(cid:182)(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16).

3.  Post-exposure prophylaxis: PEP to prevent HI(cid:61) infection includes coun-
selling,  HI(cid:61)  exposure  risk  assessment,  informed  consent,  assessment  of 
the  source  and  provision  of  (cid:40)R(cid:61)  medicines.  However,  PEP  should  not  be 
provided to a person who is known to be HI(cid:61) positive; counselling and testing 
should never be mandatory nor should the provision of PEP be delayed while 
waiting for the test results.

4.  Anti-retroviral drugs: The provision of (cid:40)R(cid:61) for PMTCT, PEP and long-term 
ART in disaster situations is feasible. Continuation of ART for those already on 
treatment prior to the disaster must be considered a priority during disaster 
response. Pregnant women already taking (cid:40)RT should continue taking (cid:40)R(cid:61) 
without  interruption.  Pregnant  women  known  to  be  HI(cid:61)  positive  should 
receive (cid:40)R(cid:61) for PMTCT according to the national protocol where possible.

Note 
Caritas Internationalis and its Members do not promote the use of, or distribute 
any form of, artificial birth control.

330

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

2.4. Essential health services – injury

Injury is usually the major cause of excess mortality and morbidity following acute-
onset natural disasters such as earthquakes. Many acute-onset natural disasters 
are  mass  casualty  events,  meaning  more  people  are  made  patients  than  the 
locally available resources can manage using routine procedures. Injury due to 
physical violence is also associated with complex emergencies. During armed 
con(cid:197)ict for example, most trauma-related deaths occur in insecure regions away 
from health facilities and therefore cannot usually be prevented by medical care. 
Interventions that aim to protect the civilian population are required to prevent 
these deaths (cid:15)see Protection Principle (cid:26), guidance notes 1(cid:182)(cid:28) on pages (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:182)(cid:26)9(cid:16).

Essential health services – injury standard 1: Injury care

People  have  access  to  effective  injury  care  during  disasters  to 
prevent avoidable morbidity, mortality and disability.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Ensure  that  local  health  workers  and  those  coordinating  the  health-sector 
response are familiar with mass casualty management (see guidance note 1).

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

 »

In mass casualty events, establish a standardised system of triage with clear 
guidance on assessment, prioritisation, basic resuscitation and referral (cid:15)see 
guidance note 1).

Ensure essential principles and skills for provision of (cid:196)rst aid and basic resus-
citation are widely understood by health workers (see guidance note 2).

Ensure that local health workers are familiar with core principles of wound 
management (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

Provide a tetanus vaccine that contains toxoid to those with dirty wounds 
and to those involved in rescue or clean-up operations (see guidance note 4).

Establish  standardised  protocols  for  the  referral  of  injured  patients  for 
advanced  care,  including  surgery  and  post-operative  care  (cid:15)see  guidance 
note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Ensure  that  de(cid:196)nitive  trauma  and  surgical  services  and  post-trauma  and 
post-surgical rehabilitation are established only by agencies with appropriate 
expertise and resources (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

331

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

Ensure  standard  assistive  devices  and  mobility  aids  (cid:15)e.g.  wheelchairs, 
crutches)  are  available  for  injured  patients  and  persons  with  disabilities  as 
soon as practical and that these aids can be repaired locally (see guidance 
note 6).

Key indicator (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

All  health  facilities  have  trained  staff  and  systems  for  the  management  of 
multiple casualties.

Guidance notes
1.  Triage: Triage is the process of categorising patients according to the severity 
of their injuries or illness, and prioritising treatment according to the availability 
of resources and the patients(cid:187) chances of survival. In mass casualty events, 
those with severe, life-threatening injuries may receive a lower priority than 
those with more survivable injuries. There is no standardised system of triage 
and several are in use throughout the world. The most common classi(cid:196)cation 
uses the four-colour code system: red signals high priority, yellow for medium 
priority, green is used for ambulatory patients and black for deceased.

2.  First aid and basic medical care: Critical procedures include restoring and 
maintaining breathing which may re(cid:88)uire clearing and protecting the airway, 
along  with  controlling  bleeding  and  administering  intravenous  (cid:197)uids  when 
required. These procedures may help to stabilise individuals with life-threat-
ening  injuries  before  transfer  to  a  referral  centre  and  greatly  increase  their 
chances of survival, even for severe injuries. Other non-operative procedures 
are e(cid:88)ually vital, such as cleaning and dressing wounds and administering 
antibiotics and tetanus prophylaxis.

3.  Wound management: In most disasters, many patients will present for care 
more than six hours after injury. Delayed presentation greatly increases the 
risk  of  wound  infection  and  preventable  excess  mortality.  It  is,  therefore, 
critical that local healthcare workers are familiarised with appropriate prin-
ciples and protocols to prevent and manage wound infection, which include 
delayed  primary  closure  and  wound  toilet  and  surgical  removal  of  foreign 
material and dead tissue.

4.  Tetanus: In sudden-onset natural disasters where there are usually a large 
number of injuries and trauma cases, risk of tetanus can be relatively high. 
While  mass  tetanus  immunisation  is  not  recommended,  tetanus  toxoid-
containing  vaccine  (cid:15)(cid:43)T  or  Td  (cid:182)  diphtheria  and  tetanus  vaccines  (cid:182)  or  (cid:43)PT, 
depending on age and vaccination history) is recommended for those with 
dirty wounds and for those involved in rescue or clean-up operations that 
put them at risk. Individuals with dirty wounds who have not previously been 

332

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

vaccinated against tetanus should receive a dose of tetanus immune globulin 
(cid:15)TIG(cid:16), if available.

5.  Trauma and surgical care: Trauma surgical care and war surgery save lives 
and long-term disability and re(cid:88)uire speci(cid:196)c training and resources that few 
agencies possess. Inappropriate or inadequate surgery may do more harm 
than doing nothing. Moreover, surgery provided without any immediate reha-
bilitation can result in a complete failure in restoring functional capacities of 
the  patient.  Only  organisations  and  professionals  with  the  relevant  exper-
tise should, therefore, establish these services that save lives and prevent 
disability.

6.  Post-operative rehabilitation for trauma-related injury: Early rehabilita-
tion can greatly increase survival and enhance the quality of life for injured 
survivors.  Patients  requiring  assistive  devices  (such  as  prostheses  and 
mobility devices(cid:16) will also need physical rehabilitation. Where available, part-
nership with community-based rehabilitation programmes can optimise the 
post-operative care and rehabilitation for injured survivors.

2.5. Essential health services – mental health

Mental  health  and  psychosocial  problems  occur  in  all  humanitarian  settings. 
The  horrors,  losses,  uncertainties  and  numerous  other  stressors  associated 
with con(cid:197)ict and other disasters place people at increased risk of diverse social, 
behavioural, psychological and psychiatric problems. Mental health and psycho-
social  support  involves  multi-sectoral  supports  (see  the  ‘intervention  pyramid’ 
diagram below). These supports require coordinated implementation e.g. through 
a  cross-cluster  or  cross-sectoral  working  group.  The  mental  health  standard 
below focuses on actions by health actors. Readers should also consult Core 
Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28) and Protection Principle (cid:26) on page (cid:26)(cid:31).

Essential health services – mental health standard 1:  
Mental health

People have access to health services that prevent or reduce mental 
health problems and associated impaired functioning.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

Ensure  interventions  are  developed  on  the  basis  of  identi(cid:196)ed  needs  and 
resources.

333

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 »

 »

 »

 »

Enable  community  members  including  marginalised  people  to  strengthen 
community self-help and social support (see guidance note 1).

Ensure  that  community  workers  including  volunteers  and  staff  at  health 
services offer psychological (cid:196)rst aid to people in acute distress after exposure 
to extreme stressors (see guidance note 2)

Ensure that there is at least one staff member at every health facility who 
manages diverse, severe mental health problems in adults and children (cid:15)see 
guidance note (cid:26)(cid:16).

(cid:40)ddress  the  safety,  basic  needs  and  rights  of  people  with  mental  health 
problems in institutions (see guidance note 4).

 » Minimise harm related to alcohol and drugs.

 »

(cid:40)s part of early recovery, initiate plans to develop a sustainable community 
mental health system (cid:15)see guidance note (cid:28)(cid:16).

Key indicator (to be read in conjunction with the guidance notes)
 »

All  health  facilities  have  trained  staff  and  systems  for  the  management  of 
mental health problems.

Guidance notes
1.  Community self-help and social support: Community self-help and social 
support form a key element of overall mental health and psychosocial multi-
sectoral supports (cid:15)see diagram below(cid:16) (cid:15)see Core Standard 1 on page (cid:28)(cid:28) and 
Protection Principle (cid:27), guidance notes 9-1(cid:26) on page (cid:27)(cid:26) and Protection Prin-
ciple (cid:26), guidance note 1(cid:28) on page (cid:27)(cid:23)(cid:16). Health agencies often employ or engage 
community  workers  and  volunteers  who  can  enable  community  members, 
including marginalised people, to increase self-help and social support.

334

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Intervention pyramid

Examples

Mental healthcare by mental 
health specialists (psychiatric 
nurses, psychologists, 
psychiatrists, etc.(cid:16)

Basic mental healthcare by 
practical primacy healthcare 
doctors
Basic emotional and pratical 
support by community workers

Activating social networks
Communal traditional supports
Supportive age friendly spaces

Specialised 

services

Focused  

non-specialised supports

Strengthening community  

and family supports

Advocacy for basic services 
that are safe, socially 
appropriate and protect dignity

Social considerations  

in basic services and security

Source: Interagency Steering Committee Reference Group on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support, 2010

2.  Psychological ﬁrst aid: Acute anxiety after exposure to extreme stressors 
(e.g. traumatic events) is best managed following the principles of psycholog-
ical (cid:196)rst aid, which is often mistakenly seen as a clinical intervention. Rather, 
it is a description of a humane, supportive response to a fellow human being 
who  is  suffering  and  who  may  need  support.  It  entails  basic,  non-intrusive 
pragmatic care with a focus on listening but not forcing talk, assessing needs 
and concerns, ensuring that basic needs are met, encouraging social support 
from  signi(cid:196)cant  others  and  protecting  from  further  harm.  Psychological 
debrie(cid:196)ng (cid:15)i.e. the promotion of ventilation by encouraging the person to brie(cid:197)y 
but  systematically  recount  perceptions,  thoughts  and  emotional  reactions 
experienced during a recent, stressful event(cid:16) is at best ineffective and should 
not be applied. Similarly, ben(cid:97)odia(cid:97)epines should be avoided in the manage-
ment of acute distress because they may interfere with natural recovery.

3.  Basic mental healthcare: People’s mental health problems may be emer-
gency-induced,  pre-existing  or  both.  People  with  severe  mental  health 
problems  should  have  access  to  a  network  of  community-based  social 
supports  as  well  as  clinical  care  through  available  health  services  (e.g. 
general hospitals, primary care clinics, etc.(cid:16). Organising basic clinical mental 
healthcare usually involves either organising rapid training and supervision of 
general health staff or adding a mental health professional to the health clinic. 
Essential psychotropics and anti-epileptics need to be available. Individuals 

335

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

who have been receiving mental health treatment before the crisis need to 
have access to continued treatment.

4.  People in institutions: Mental hospitals and residential homes for people 
with severe mental problems need to be visited regularly, especially early in 
the crisis, because the risk of severe neglect or abuse of people in institutions 
is extremely high. Safety, basic physical needs (cid:15)water, food, shelter, sanita-
tion and medical care(cid:16), human rights surveillance and basic psychiatric and 
psychosocial care must be provided throughout the crisis.

5.  Early recovery: Because humanitarian crises increase the rates of a broad 
range of mental disorders, plans need to be initiated to develop the mental 
health system to scale up effective mental health treatment coverage across 
the affected area (cid:15)see Core Standard (cid:27) on page (cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:16).

2.6. Essential health services – non-communicable 

diseases

Population ageing and increase in life expectancy have shifted disease pro(cid:196)les 
from  infectious  to  non-communicable  diseases  (NCDs)  in  many  countries 
including low- and middle-income countries. (cid:40)s a result, NC(cid:43)s are growing in 
importance as a major public health issue in disaster settings. Increases in health 
problems  due  to  the  exacerbation  of  existing  chronic  health  conditions  have 
become a common feature of many disasters.

Essential health services – non-communicable diseases 
standard 1: Non-communicable diseases

People have access to essential therapies to reduce morbidity and 
mortality due to acute complications or exacerbation of their chronic 
health condition.

Key actions (to be read in conjunction with the guidance note)
 »

Assess  and  document  the  prevalence  of  NCDs  and  share  the  data  with 
agencies responding to the disaster (see guidance note 1).

 »

Ensure identi(cid:196)cation of individuals with NC(cid:43)s who were receiving treatment 
before the emergency and ensure that they continue to do so. Avoid sudden 
discontinuation of treatment.

336

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

 »

 »

 »

Ensure  that  people  with  acute  complications  and  exacerbations  of  NCDs 
that pose a threat to their life (cid:15)e.g. heart diseases, severe hypertension(cid:16) and 
individuals in pain (e.g. pain due to advanced cancer) receive treatment.

In  situations  where  treatments  for  NC(cid:43)s  are  unavailable,  establish  clear 
standard operating procedures for referral.

Ensure that essential diagnostic e(cid:88)uipment, core laboratory tests and medi-
cation for the routine, ongoing management of NC(cid:43)s are available through 
the  primary  healthcare  system.  This  medication  must  be  speci(cid:196)ed  on  the 
essential medicines list.

 »

Ensure that assistive devices (e.g. walking aids) are available for people with 
mobility or communication dif(cid:196)culties.

Key indicators (to be read in conjunction with the guidance note)
 »

All primary healthcare facilities have clear standard operating procedures for 
referrals of patients with NCDs to secondary and tertiary care facilities.

 »

All primary healthcare facilities have adequate medication for continuation of 
treatment to individuals with NCDs who were receiving treatment before the 
emergency.

Guidance note
1.  Non-communicable diseases include heart disease, stroke, hypertension, 
chronic  renal  failure,  bronchial  asthma,  dialysis-dependent  chronic  renal 
failure, insulin-dependent diabetes and epilepsy. (cid:43)uring emergencies, indi-
viduals with chronic medical conditions are particularly vulnerable to exacer-
bations of their condition or to complications such as secondary infections 
and are at risk when treatment is interrupted. Clinical stabilisation and main-
tenance of therapy should be the mainstay of the health-sector response in 
humanitarian settings.

People  with  NC(cid:43)s  need  long-term  medication  and  follow-up.  The  routine, 
ongoing  management  of  NCDs  should  be  available  through  the  primary 
healthcare system, using medications from the essential medicines list. (cid:41)ut 
it is generally not recommended to introduce new therapeutic regimens or 
programmes  for  the  management  of  chronic  health  conditions  during  the 
relief effort especially if the regimen or programme is unlikely to be continued 
after the emergency phase.

337

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 1
Health assessment checklist

Preparation

 » Obtain available information on the disaster-affected population.

 » Obtain available maps and aerial photographs.

 » Obtain demographic and health data.

Security and access

 » Determine the existence of the ongoing natural or human-generated hazards.

 » (cid:43)etermine  the  overall  security  situation,  including  the  presence  of  armed 

forces.

 » Determine  the  access  that  humanitarian  agencies  have  to  the  disaster-

affected population.

Demographics and social structure

 » (cid:43)etermine  the  total  si(cid:97)e  of  the  disaster-affected  population;  age  and  sex 

breakdown of the population.

 »

Identify groups at increased risk, e.g. women, children, older people, persons 
with disabilities.

 » Determine  the  average  household  size  and  estimates  of  the  number  of 

female- and child-headed households.

 » (cid:43)etermine the existing social structure, including positions of authority and(cid:22)

or in(cid:197)uence.

Background health information

 »

Identify pre-existing health problems in the disaster-affected area prior to the 
disaster.

338

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

 »

 »

 »

 »

Identify pre-existing health problems in the country of origin in refugees (area 
of origin for internally displaced persons).

Identify existing risks to health, e.g. potential epidemic diseases.

Identify previous sources of healthcare.

Analyse the performance of health system functions.

Mortality rates

 » Calculate the crude mortality rate.

 » Calculate the age-speci(cid:196)c mortality rates (cid:15)e.g. under-(cid:28) mortality rate(cid:16).

 » Calculate cause-speci(cid:196)c mortality rates.

 » Calculate proportional mortality rate.

Morbidity rates

 » Determine  incidence  rates  of  major  diseases  that  have  public  health 

importance.

 » (cid:43)etermine  age-  and  sex-speci(cid:196)c  incidence  rates  of  major  diseases  where 

possible.

Available resources

 » Determine the capacity of the Ministry of Health of the country affected by 

the disaster.

 » (cid:43)etermine the status of national health facilities, including total number by 

type of care provided, physical status and access.

 » Determine the numbers and skills of available health staff.

 » (cid:43)etermine the available health budgets and (cid:196)nancing mechanism.

 » Determine  the  capacity  and  functional  status  of  existing  public  health 

programmes, e.g. Extended Programme on Immuni(cid:97)ation.

 » (cid:43)etermine  the  availability  of  standardised  protocols,  essential  medicines, 

supplies and logistics systems.

 » Determine the status of existing referral systems.

 » Determine the level of environmental health in healthcare facilities.

 » Determine the status of the existing health information system.

339

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Data from other relevant sectors

 » Nutritional status

 »

 »

 »

 »

Food and food security

Environmental conditions

Shelter – quality of shelter

Education – health and hygiene education

340

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Appendix 2
Sample weekly surveillance reporting forms

Mortality surveillance form 1*
Site:  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 

Date from Monday:   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  To Sunday:   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 

Total population at beginning of this week:  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 

Births this week:    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Deaths this week: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 

Arrivals this week (if applicable): .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Departures this week: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 

Total population at end of week: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Total under (cid:28) years population:  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 

0-4 yrs

(cid:28)(cid:18) yrs

Total

male

female

male

female

Immediate cause
Acute lower respiratory infection
Cholera (suspected)
Diarrhoea – bloody
Diarrhoea – watery
Injury – non-accidental
Malaria
Maternal death – direct
Measles
Meningitis (suspected)
Neonatal (0–28 days)
Other
Unknown
Total by age and sex

Underlying cause
AIDS (suspected)
Malnutrition
Maternal death – indirect
Non-communicable diseases (cid:15)speci(cid:196)y(cid:16)
Other
Total by age and sex
*  This form is used when there are many deaths and therefore more detailed information on individual deaths cannot 

be collected due to time limitations.

-  Other causes of mortality can be added according to context and epidemiological pattern.
-  Age can be further disaggregated (0–11 mths, 1–4 yrs, 5–14 yrs, 15–49 yrs, 50–59 yrs, 60–69 yrs, 70–79 yrs,  

80+ yrs) as feasible.

-  Deaths should not be reported solely from health facilities, but should include reports from site and religious 

leaders, community workers, women’s groups and referral hospitals.

-  Whenever possible, case definitions should be put on back of form.

341

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Mortality surveillance form 2*
Site:  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  

Date from Monday:   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  To Sunday:   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  

Total population at beginning of this week:  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  

Births this week:    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Deaths this week: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  

Arrivals this week (if applicable): .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Departures this week: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  

Total population at end of week: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Total under (cid:28) years population:  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  

Direct cause of death

Underlying 
causes

)
y
f
i

l

i

i

c
e
p
s
(
 
.
s
d
 
e
b
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
c
-
n
o
N

t
c
e
r
i
d
n
i
 
–
 
h
t
a
e
d

 
l
a
n
r
e
t
a
M

)
y
y
/
m
m
/
d
d

(
 
e
t
a
D

)
y
f
i

c
e
p
s
(
 
r
e
h
t
O

)

d
e
t
c
e
p
s
u
s
(
 

S
D
A

I

n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
n
a
M

l

)
y
f
i

c
e
p
s
(
 
r
e
h
t
O

n
w
o
n
k
n
U

)
.

o
n
 
k
c
o
b

l

 
.

g

.
e
(
 
e
t
i
s
 
n
i
 
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
L

e
m
o
h
 
t
a
 
r
o

 
l
a
t
i
p
s
o
h
 
n
i
 

d
e
D

i

l

i

a
t
n
e
d
c
c
a
-
n
o
n
 
–
 
y
r
u
n

j

I

t
c
e
r
i
d
 
–
 
h
t
a
e
d

 
l
a
n
r
e
t
a
M

)

d
e
t
c
e
p
s
u
s
(
 
s
i
t
i
g
n
n
e
M

i

)
s
y
a
d
8
2
–
0

 

(
 
l
a
t
a
n
o
e
N

l

s
e
s
a
e
M

a
i
r
a
a
M

l

y
r
e
t
a
w
 
–
 
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
D

i

l

y
d
o
o
b
 
–
 
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
D

i

(cid:16)
y
(cid:36)
s
r
y
 
,

m
(cid:36)
s
h
t
m

 
,

d
(cid:36)
s
y
a
d

(cid:15)
 
e
g
(cid:40)

n
o
i
t
c
e

f

n
i
 
y
r
o
t
a
r
i
p
s
e
r
 
r
e
w
o

l
 
e
t
u
c
A

)

d
e
t
c
e
p
s
u
s
(
 
a
r
e
o
h
C

l

(cid:16)
f
 
,

m

(cid:15)
 
x
e
S

o
N

1

2

(cid:26)

4

(cid:28)

6

7

8

*  This form is used when there is enough time to record data on individual deaths; it allows analysis by age, outbreak 

investigation by location and facility utilisation rates.

-  Frequency of reporting (i.e. daily or weekly) depends upon the number of deaths.
-  Other causes of death can be added as fits the situation.
-  Deaths should not be reported solely from site health facilities, but should include reports from site and religious 

leaders, community workers, women’s groups and referral hospitals.

-  Whenever possible, case definitions should be put on back of form.

342

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Sample weekly EWARN reporting form*
(cid:17)  This form is used in the acute phase of the emergency when the risk of epidemic-prone diseases 

is high

Date from Monday:   .  .  .  . To Sunday:  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  

Town(cid:22)(cid:61)illage(cid:22)Settlement(cid:22)Camp: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  

Province: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . District: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Subdistrict:   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  

Site name: .  .  .  (cid:139) Inpatient  (cid:139) Outpatient 

(cid:139) Health centre 

(cid:139) Mobile clinic

Supporting agency(ies):  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Reporting of(cid:196)cer (cid:13) contact number:   .  .  .  .  

Total population: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Total under (cid:28) years population: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
A. WEEKLY AGGREGATE DATA
New cases of:

MORTALITY

MORBIDITY

Total

(cid:35) (cid:28) years

(cid:28) years (cid:13) over  (cid:35) (cid:28) years

(cid:28) years (cid:13) over 

TOTAL ADMISSIONS

TOTAL DEATHS

Acute respiratory infection

Acute watery diarrhoea

Acute bloody diarrhoea

Malaria (cid:182) suspected(cid:22)con(cid:196)rmed

Measles

Meningitis – suspected

Acute haemorrhagic fever syndrome

Acute jaundice syndrome

(cid:40)cute (cid:197)accid paralysis (cid:15)(cid:40)FP(cid:16)

Tetanus

Other fever (cid:37) (cid:26)(cid:31).(cid:28)(cid:135)C

Injuries/wounds

Others

Total

-  More than one diagnosis is possible; the most important should be recorded. Each case should be counted only once.
-  Include only those cases that were seen (or deaths that occurred) during the surveillance week. 
-  Write “0” (zero) if you had no case or death during the week for one of the syndrome listed in the form. 
-  Deaths should be reported only in the mortality section, NOT in the morbidity section.
-  Case definitions for each condition under surveillance should be written on the back on this form.
-  Causes of morbidity can be added or subtracted according to the epidemiology and risk assessment of disease.
-  The purpose of EWARN surveillance is the early detection of epidemic-prone diseases.
-  Data on conditions such as malnutrition should be obtained through surveys (prevalence) rather than surveillance 

(incidence).

B. OUTBREAK ALERT

(cid:40)t any time you suspect any of the following diseases, please SMS or phone (cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)..  
or email (cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)... with maximum information on time, place and number of cases and deaths:

cholera, shigellosis, measles, polio, typhoid, tetanus, hepatitis (cid:40) or E, dengue, meningitis, 
diphtheria, pertussis, haemorrhagic fever

(this list of diseases will vary depending on the disease epidemiology of the country).

343

(cid:60)nder (cid:28) years  
(new cases)#
Male

(cid:28) years and over  
(new cases)
Male

Total

Total

Repeat 
cases
new cases Total

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Sample routine morbidity surveillance reporting form*
(cid:17)  Morbidity surveillance can be expanded from EW(cid:40)RN after the acute phase to include other 

diseases and monitoring of other indicators as appropriate

Site:  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
Date from Monday:   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  To Sunday:   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
Total population at beginning of this week/month:   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
Births this week/month: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Deaths this week/month:  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
Arrivals this week/month (if applicable): .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
Departures this week/month:  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
Total population at end of week/month: .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  Total under (cid:28) years population:  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
Morbidity

Total

Female

Female

(cid:43)iagnosis(cid:17)
Acute respiratory 
infection(cid:17)(cid:17)
Acute watery 
diarrhoea
Acute bloody 
diarrhoea
Malaria – suspected/
con(cid:196)rmed
Measles
Meningitis 
– suspected
Acute haemorrhagic 
fever syndrome
Acute jaundice 
syndrome
(cid:40)cute (cid:197)accid 
paralysis (AFP)
Tetanus
Other fever (cid:37) (cid:26)(cid:31).(cid:28)(cid:135)C
(cid:40)I(cid:43)S (cid:182) suspected (cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)
Eye diseases
Malnutrition (cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:17)
Injuries – accidental
Injuries 
– non-accidental
Sexually transmitted 
infections
Genital ulcer disease
Male urethral 
discharge
(cid:61)aginal discharge
Lower abdominal 
pain
Skin diseases
Non-communicable 
diseases (e.g. 
diabetes)
Worms
Others
Unknown
Total
* More than one diagnosis is possible; causes of morbidity can be added or subtracted according to context and 
epidemiological pattern.
** Acute respiratory tract infections: in some countries, this category may be divided into upper and lower tract 
infections.
*** HIV and AIDS prevalence is best assessed through surveys.
**** Malnutrition prevalence is best assessed through rapid surveys (MUAC or weight/height screening) as 
surveillance only reveals those who come to seek care. 
# Ages can be further disaggregated as feasible.

344

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

OUTBREAK ALERT
(cid:40)t any time you suspect any of the following diseases, please SMS or phone (cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175).. 
or email(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)(cid:175)...with maximum information on time, place and number of cases and deaths:
cholera, dysentery(cid:22)shigellosis, measles, (cid:40)FP, typhoid, tetanus, hepatitis, dengue, meningitis, 
diphtheria, pertussis, haemorrhagic fever.

(cid:61)isits to  
health facility
Total visits

(cid:60)nder (cid:28) years
Male

Female

Total

(cid:28) years and over
Male

Female

Total

Total
Male

Female

Utilisation rate: Number of visits per person per year to health facility = total number of visits  
in 1 week (cid:22) total population x (cid:28)(cid:25) weeks
-  (cid:40)ges can be further disaggregated (cid:15)(cid:23)(cid:182)11 mths, 1(cid:182)(cid:27) yrs, (cid:28)(cid:182)1(cid:27) yrs, 1(cid:28)(cid:182)(cid:27)9 yrs, (cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:182)(cid:28)9 yrs, (cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:18) yrs(cid:16) 

as feasible.

Number of consulations per clinician: Number of total visits (new and repeat) / FTE clinician in health 
facility/number of days health facility functioning per week.

345

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Appendix 3
Formulas for calculating key health indicators

Crude mortality rate (CMR)

Definition: The rate of death in the entire population, including both women 
and men, and all ages.

Formula:

Total number of deaths  

during time period

Mid-period population at risk x 
Number of days in time period

Under-5 mortality rate (U5MR)

x1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) persons  =

     Deaths/ 

1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) persons(cid:22)
day

Definition:  The  rate  of  death  among  children  below  (cid:28)  years  of  age  in  the 
population.

Formula:

Total number of deaths  

in children  

(cid:35)(cid:28) years during time period 

Total number of children (cid:35)(cid:28) 

years x Number of days in time 

period

x1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) persons =

     Deaths/ 

1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) children 
under (cid:28) years(cid:22) 
day

Incidence rate

Definition: The number of new cases of a disease that occur during a speci-
(cid:196)ed period of time in a population at risk of developing the disease.

Formula:
Number of new cases due to 
speci(cid:196)c disease in time period x1,(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) persons =    
developing disease x Number 

Population at risk of 

of months in time period

New cases due to 
speci(cid:196)c disease(cid:22) 
1,(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) persons(cid:22)
month

346

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Case fatality rate (CFR)

Definition: The number of people who die of a disease divided by the number 
of people who have the disease.

Formula:

Number of people dying from  

disease during time period

People who have the disease  

during time period 

x 100 =  x(cid:12)

Health facility utilisation rate

Definition:  The  number  of  outpatient  visits  per  person  per  year.  Whenever 
possible,  a  distinction  should  be  drawn  between  new  and  old  visits,  and 
new visits should be used to calculate this rate. However, it is often dif(cid:196)cult 
to differentiate between new and old visits, so they are fre(cid:88)uently combined 
as total visits during a disaster.

Formula:

Total number of visits  

in one week

Total population

x (cid:28)(cid:25) weeks =

   (cid:61)isits(cid:22) 
person/ 
year

Number of consultations per clinician per day

Definition:  Average  number  of  total  consultations  (new  and  repeat  cases) 
seen by each clinician per day.

Formula:

Total number of consultations in one week

Number FTE(cid:17) clinicians in health facility 

 ÷ 

    Number of days 
health facility open 
per week

* FTE (full-time equivalent) refers to the equivalent number of clinicians working in a health facility. For example, 
if there are six clinicians working in the outpatient department but two of them work half-time, then the number 
of FTE clinicians = 4 full-time staff + 2 half-time staff = 5 FTE clinicians.

347

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

References and  
further reading
Sources

International legal instruments
The  Right  to  the  Highest  Attainable  Standard  of  Health  (Article  12  of  the 
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights(cid:16), CESCR General 
Comment 1(cid:27), 11 (cid:40)ugust (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23). (cid:60)N (cid:43)oc. E(cid:22)C.1(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:22)(cid:27). Committee on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights.
World Health Organi(cid:97)ation (cid:15)WHO(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16), (cid:25)(cid:28) (cid:56)uestions (cid:13) (cid:40)nswers on Health (cid:13) 
Human Rights. Health (cid:13) Human Rights Publication Issue No. 1. Geneva.  
http:(cid:22)(cid:22)wh(cid:88)libdoc.who.int(cid:22)h(cid:88)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:22)9(cid:25)(cid:27)1(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:29)9(cid:23).pdf

Health systems
Inter-(cid:40)gency  Network  for  Education  in  Emergencies  (cid:15)INEE(cid:16)  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16),  Minimum 
Standards for Education in Emergencies, Chronic Crises and Early Reconstruction. 
Geneva. www.exacteditions.com(cid:22)exact(cid:22)browse(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:22)(cid:27)9(cid:27)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:27)7(cid:38)dps(cid:36)on
Inter-(cid:40)gency  Steering  Committee  (cid:15)I(cid:40)SC(cid:16)  Global  Health  Cluster  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Health 
Cluster Guide: A practical guide for country-level implementation of the Health 
Cluster. WHO. Geneva.
Management  Sciences  for  Health  (cid:15)1997(cid:16),  Managing  (cid:43)rug  Supply,  (cid:25)nd  edition.
(cid:50)umarian Press. (cid:41)loom(cid:196)eld, CT, (cid:60)S(cid:40).
Of(cid:196)ce of the (cid:60)nited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (cid:15)(cid:60)NHCR(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), 
Emergency Health Information System. www.unhcr.org(cid:22)pages(cid:22)(cid:27)9c(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:27)(cid:29)ce(cid:23).html
Pan (cid:40)merican Health Organi(cid:97)ation (cid:15)P(cid:40)HO(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16), Natural (cid:43)isasters: protecting 
the public(cid:187)s health. Scienti(cid:196)c Publication No. (cid:28)7(cid:28). Washington (cid:43)C.
WHO (cid:15)199(cid:27)(cid:16), Health Laboratory Facilities in Emergencies and (cid:43)isaster Situations.
Geneva.
WHO (cid:15)1999(cid:16), Guidelines for (cid:43)rug (cid:43)onations, (cid:25)nd edition. Geneva.
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:16), World health report (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) (cid:182) Health systems: improving performance. 
Geneva. www.who.int/whr/2000/en/index.html

348

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16),  Macroeconomics  and  health:  Investing  in  health  for  economic 
development. Geneva.
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Model Lists of Essential Medicines. Geneva. 
www.who.int/medicines/publications/essentialmedicines/en/index.html
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  The  Interagency  Emergency  Health  (cid:50)it:  Medicines  and  Medical 
(cid:43)evices for 1(cid:23),(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23) People for (cid:40)pproximately (cid:26) Months, (cid:27)th edition. Geneva.
WHO and P(cid:40)HO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16), Health Library for (cid:43)isasters. Geneva.  
http://helid.desastres.net/

Control of communicable diseases
Heymann,  (cid:43)avid  L  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Control  of  Communicable  (cid:43)iseases  Manual,  19th 
edition. American Public Health Association. Washington DC.
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25)(cid:16),  Guidelines  for  the  Collection  of  Clinical  Specimens  (cid:43)uring  Field 
Investigation of Outbreaks. Geneva.
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), Communicable disease control in emergencies. Geneva.
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Malaria  Control  in  Complex  Emergencies:  (cid:40)n  Interagency  Field 
Handbook. Geneva.
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Tuberculosis  Care  and  Control  in  Refugee  and  (cid:43)isplaced 
Populations: (cid:40)n Interagency Field Manual, (cid:25)nd edition.Geneva.

Child health
WHO  (cid:15)1997(cid:16),  Immunisation  in  Practice.  (cid:40)  Guide  for  Health  Workers  Who  Give 
(cid:61)accines. Macmillan. London.
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  IMCI  Handbook  (cid:15)Integrated  Management  of  Childhood  Illness(cid:16). 
Geneva.
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Pocket  book  of  hospital  care  for  children:  Guidelines  for  the 
management of common illnesses with limited resources. Geneva.
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), Manual for the health care of children in humanitarian emergencies. 
Geneva.
(cid:60)nited Nations Children(cid:187)s Fund (cid:15)(cid:60)NICEF(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), The State of the World(cid:187)s Children 
2009. New York. www.unicef.org/sowc09/docs/SOWC09-FullReport-EN.pdf

Sexual and reproductive health
I(cid:40)SC (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Guidelines for (cid:40)ddressing HI(cid:61) in Humanitarian Settings.
www.aidsandemergencies.org(cid:22)cms(cid:22)documents(cid:22)I(cid:40)SC(cid:70)HI(cid:61)(cid:70)Guidelines(cid:70) 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:70)En.pdf

349

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Inter-Agency Working Group on Reproductive Health in Crises (2010 revision for 
(cid:196)eld review(cid:16), Inter-agency Field Manual on Reproductive Health in Humanitarian 
Settings.
Women(cid:187)s Commission for Refugee Women and Children (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Minimum Initial 
Service Package (MISP) for Reproductive Health: A Distance Learning Module. 
http://misp.rhrc.org/
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Pregnancy, Childbirth, Postpartum and Newborn Care: (cid:40) guide for 
essential practice, (cid:25)nd edition. Geneva.  
http:(cid:22)(cid:22)wh(cid:88)libdoc.who.int(cid:22)publications(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:22)9(cid:25)(cid:27)1(cid:28)9(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:27)(cid:63)(cid:70)eng.pdf
WHO and (cid:60)NHCR (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16), Clinical Management of Rape Survivors: (cid:43)eveloping 
Protocols for use with Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons. Geneva.
WHO, (cid:60)nited Nations Population Fund (cid:15)(cid:60)NFP(cid:40)(cid:16) and (cid:40)ndalucia School of Public 
Health  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Granada  Consensus  on  Sexual  and  Reproductive  Health  in 
Protracted Crises and Recovery. Granada, Spain.

Injury
Hayward-(cid:50)arlsson, (cid:49) et al (cid:15)199(cid:31)(cid:16), Hospitals for War-Wounded: (cid:40) Practical Guide 
for  Setting  (cid:60)p  and  Running  a  Surgical  Hospital  in  an  (cid:40)rea  of  (cid:40)rmed  Con(cid:197)ict. 
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Geneva.
P(cid:40)HO  (cid:15)199(cid:28),  reprint  (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16),  Establishing  a  Mass  Casualty  Management 
System.  Washington  DC.  www.disasterpublications.info/english/viewtopic.
php?topic=victimasmasa
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Integrated  Management  for  Emergency  and  Essential  Surgical 
Care tool kit: Disaster Management Guidelines. Geneva. www.who.int/surgery/
publications/Disastermanagguide.pdf

Mental health
I(cid:40)SC  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  I(cid:40)SC  Guidelines  on  Mental  Health  and  Psychosocial  Support  in 
Emergency Settings. Geneva. www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc
I(cid:40)SC Reference Group on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), Mental 
Health and Psychosocial Support (MHPSS) In Humanitarian Emergencies: What 
Should Humanitarian Health (cid:40)ctors (cid:50)now(cid:38) Geneva. 
www.who.int(cid:22)mental(cid:70)health(cid:22)emergencies(cid:22)en(cid:22)
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), mhG(cid:40)P Intervention Guide for Mental, Neurological and Substance 
Use Disorders in Non-specialized Health Settings. Geneva.
www.who.int(cid:22)mental(cid:70)health(cid:22)
WHO,  World  (cid:61)ision  International  and  War  Trauma  Foundation  (cid:15)forthcoming(cid:16), 
Psychological First Aid Guide. Geneva.

350

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

Non-communicable diseases
Spiegel  et  al  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16),  Health-care  needs  of  people  affected  by  con(cid:197)ict:  future 
trends and changing frameworks. Lancet, (cid:61)ol. (cid:26)7(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26) (cid:49)anuary (cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23).
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  The  Management  of  Cardiovascular  (cid:43)isease,  (cid:43)iabetes,  (cid:40)sthma 
and  Chronic  Obstructive  Pulmonary  Disease  in  Emergency  and  Humanitarian 
Settings. (cid:43)raft, (cid:25)(cid:31) February (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31). Geneva.
WHO 
Interventions (WHO PEN). Geneva.

(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  WHO  Package  of  Essential  Non-communicable  (cid:43)isease 

Further reading

International legal instruments
Mann, (cid:49) et al (cid:15)eds(cid:16) (cid:15)1999(cid:16), Health and Human Rights: (cid:40) Reader. Routledge. New 
York.
(cid:41)accino-(cid:40)strada, (cid:40) (cid:15)19(cid:31)(cid:25)(cid:16), Manual on the Rights and (cid:43)uties of Medical Personnel 
in (cid:40)rmed Con(cid:197)icts. ICRC. Geneva.

Health systems
(cid:41)eaglehole,  R,  (cid:41)onita,  R  and  (cid:50)jellstrom,  T  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16),  (cid:41)asic  Epidemiology,  (cid:25)nd 
edition. WHO. Geneva.
I(cid:40)SC Global Health Cluster (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23)(cid:16), GHC position paper: removing user fees for 
primary health care services during humanitarian crises. Geneva.
(cid:49)ohns Hopkins (cid:41)loomberg School of Public Health and International Federation 
of  Red  Cross  and  Red  Crescent  Societies  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16),  Public  health  guide  in 
emergencies. Geneva. www.ifrc.org/what/health/relief/guide.asp
M(cid:116)decins  sans  Fronti(cid:117)res  (cid:15)MSF(cid:16)  (cid:15)1997(cid:16),  Refugee  Health.  (cid:40)n  (cid:40)pproach  to 
Emergency Situations. Macmillan. London.
Noji,  E  (cid:15)ed(cid:16)  (cid:15)1997(cid:16),  The  Public  Health  Conse(cid:88)uences  of  (cid:43)isasters.  Oxford 
University Press. New York.
Perrin, P (cid:15)199(cid:29)(cid:16), Handbook on War and Public Health. ICRC. Geneva.
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), The Interagency Emergency Health (cid:50)it (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29). Geneva.

Essential health services
Checchi,  F  and  Roberts,  L  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16),  Interpreting  and  using  mortality  data 
in  humanitarian  emergencies.  Humanitarian  Practice  Network.  Overseas 
Development Institute. London. www.odihpn.org

351

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

MSF (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Rapid health assessment of refugee or displaced populations. Paris.
SM(cid:40)RT (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Measuring Mortality, Nutritional Status and Food Security in Crisis 
Situations:  Standardized  Monitoring  and  Assessment  of  Relief  and  Transition. 
www.smartindicators.org
(cid:60)NHCR (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), (cid:60)NHCR(cid:187)s Priniciples and Guidance for Referral Health Care for 
Refugees and Other Persons of Concern. Geneva. www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/
vtx(cid:22)search(cid:38)page(cid:36)search(cid:13)docid(cid:36)(cid:27)b(cid:27)c(cid:27)fca9(cid:13)(cid:88)uery(cid:36)referral(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)guidelines
WHO (cid:15)1999(cid:16), Rapid Health (cid:40)ssessment Protocols for Emergencies. Geneva.

Control of communicable diseases
Cook, GC, Manson, P and (cid:65)umla, (cid:40)I (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), Manson(cid:187)s Tropical (cid:43)iseases, (cid:25)(cid:25)nd 
edition. WB Saunders.
Connolly,  M(cid:40)  et  al  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16),  Communicable  diseases  in  complex  emergencies: 
impact and challenges. The Lancet. London.
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:27)(cid:16), Cholera outbreak, assessing the outbreak response and improving 
preparedness. Geneva.
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), Guidelines for the control of shigellosis, including epidemics due to 
shigella dysenteriae type 1. Geneva.

Child health
WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:16), Guidelines for the management of common illnesses with limited 
resources. Geneva.
WHO, (cid:60)NFP(cid:40), (cid:60)NICEF and The World (cid:41)ank Group (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16), Managing Newborn 
Problems: (cid:40) guide for doctors, nurses, and midwives. Geneva. 
http:(cid:22)(cid:22)wh(cid:88)libdoc.who.int(cid:22)publications(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:22)9(cid:25)(cid:27)1(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:29)(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23).pdf

Sexual and reproductive health
Inter-agency Standing Committee (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16), Guidelines for Gender-based (cid:61)iolence 
Interventions in Humanitarian Emergencies. Geneva.
International  Rescue  Committee  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16),  Protecting  the  Future:  HI(cid:61)  Prevention, 
Care  and  Support  (cid:40)mong  (cid:43)isplaced  and  War-(cid:40)ffected  Populations.  (cid:50)umarian 
Press. (cid:41)loom(cid:196)eld, CT, (cid:60)S(cid:40).
UNFPA  and  Inter-agency  Working  Group  on  Reproductive  Health  in  Refugee 
Situations (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), The Reproductive Health (cid:50)it for Emergency Situations.
(cid:60)NHCR  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29)(cid:16),  Note  on  HI(cid:61)(cid:22)(cid:40)I(cid:43)S  and  the  Protection  of  Refugees,  I(cid:43)Ps  and 
Other Persons of Concern. Geneva. www.unhcr.org/444e20892.html
(cid:60)NHCR (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), (cid:40)ntiretroviral Medication Policy for Refugees. Geneva. 
www.unhcr.org(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:28)b(cid:27)79(cid:29)(cid:27)(cid:25).html

352

M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H e a l t h   A c t i o n

(cid:60)NHCR  and  Southern  (cid:40)frican  Clinicians  Society  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Clinical  guidelines  on 
antiretroviral therapy management for displaced populations. 
www.unhcr.org(cid:22)cgi-bin(cid:22)texis(cid:22)vtx(cid:22)search(cid:38)page(cid:36)search(cid:13)docid(cid:36)(cid:27)(cid:29)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31)d(cid:28)f(cid:25)(cid:13)(cid:88)uer
y(cid:36)art(cid:12)(cid:25)(cid:23)guidelines
(cid:60)NHCR, WHO and the (cid:49)oint (cid:60)nited Nations Programme on HI(cid:61)(cid:22)(cid:40)I(cid:43)S (cid:15)(cid:60)N(cid:40)I(cid:43)S(cid:16) 
(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16), Policy Statement on HI(cid:61) Testing and Counselling in Health Facilities for 
Refugees, Internally (cid:43)isplaced Persons and other Persons of Concern to (cid:60)NHCR. 
Geneva. www.unhcr.org(cid:22)(cid:27)b(cid:28)(cid:23)(cid:31)b9c9.html
WHO, (cid:60)NFP(cid:40), (cid:60)NICEF and The World (cid:41)ank Group (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23), reprint (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16), Managing 
Complications in Pregnancy and Childbirth: A guide for midwives and doctors. 
Geneva. http:(cid:22)(cid:22)wh(cid:88)libdoc.who.int(cid:22)publications(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:22)9(cid:25)(cid:27)1(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:31)79(cid:70)eng.pdf

Injury
International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics (cid:15)ISPO(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)1(cid:16), ISPO consensus 
conference  on  appropriate  orthopaedic  technology  for  low-income  countries: 
conclusions and recommendations. Prosthetics Orthotics International. (cid:61)ol. (cid:25)(cid:28), 
pp 168–170.
ISPO Code of Conduct for International Non-Governmental Prosthetics, Orthotics, 
and Mobility Assistance: www.usispo.org/code.asp
Landmines  Survivors  Network  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Prosthetics  and  Orthotics  Programme 
Guide:  implementing  P(cid:13)O  services  in  poor  settings:  guide  for  planners  and 
providers of services for persons in need of orthopaedic devices. Geneva.
Landmine  Survivors  Network  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7(cid:16),  Prosthetics  and  Orthotics  Project  Guide: 
supporting  P(cid:13)O  services  in  low-income  settings  a  common  approach  for 
organizations implementing aid projects. Geneva.
MSF (cid:15)19(cid:31)9(cid:16), Minor Surgical Procedures in Remote (cid:40)reas. Paris.
WHO  (cid:15)1991(cid:16),  Surgery  at  the  (cid:43)istrict  Hospital:  Obstetrics,  Gynaecology, 
Orthopaedics and Traumatology. Geneva.

Mental health
(cid:60)NHCR and WHO (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), Rapid (cid:40)ssessment of (cid:40)lcohol and Other Substance 
(cid:60)se in Con(cid:197)ict-affected and (cid:43)isplaced Populations: (cid:40) Field Guide. Geneva. 
www.who.int(cid:22)mental(cid:70)health(cid:22)emergencies(cid:22)en(cid:22)
WHO  (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9(cid:16),  Pharmacological  treatment  of  mental  disorders  in  primary  health 
care. Geneva. www.who.int(cid:22)mental(cid:70)health(cid:22)

353

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Non-communicable diseases
Fauci, (cid:40)S et al (cid:15)eds(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:16), Harrison(cid:187)s Principles of Internal Medicine, 1(cid:28)th edition. 
McGraw Hill Professional. New York.
Foster,  C  et  al  (cid:15)eds(cid:16),  The  Washington  Manual  of  Medical  Therapeutics,  (cid:26)(cid:26)rd 
edition. Lippincott Williams (cid:13) Wilkins Publishers. Philadelphia.
Tierny, LM, McPhee, S(cid:49), Papadakis, M(cid:40) (cid:15)eds(cid:16) (cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:16), Current Medical (cid:43)iagnosis 
and Treatment, (cid:27)(cid:25)nd edition. McGraw-Hill(cid:22)(cid:40)ppleton (cid:13) Lange. New (cid:64)ork.

354

Annexes

355

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Annex 1
Key Documents that inform
the Humanitarian Charter

The  Humanitarian  Charter  sets  out  shared  beliefs  and  common  principles 
concerning  humanitarian  action  and  responsibilities  in  situations  of  disaster  or 
con(cid:197)ict,  and  notes  that  these  are  re(cid:197)ected  in  international  law.  The  following 
annotated  list  of  key  documents  includes  the  most  relevant  international  legal 
instruments  relating  to  international  human  rights,  international  humanitarian 
law (cid:15)IHL(cid:16), refugee law and humanitarian action. It does not attempt to represent 
regional law and developments. The list also includes a number of other guide-
lines, principles, standards and frameworks that inform the Humanitarian Charter. 
(cid:40)s  this  is  necessarily  very  selective,  further  resources  and  web  links  to  these 
documents are available on the Sphere Project website (www.sphereproject.org). 
Owing  to  the  limitations  of  space,  notes  are  provided  only  for  the  documents 
which seemed to re(cid:88)uire introduction or special explanation, because they are 
newer or have speci(cid:196)c sections concerning disaster or con(cid:197)ict.

The documents are listed thematically, under the headings of:

1.  Human rights, protection and vulnerability
2.  Armed conﬂict and humanitarian assistance
3.  Refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs)
4.  Disasters and humanitarian assistance

To  ensure  clarity  about  the  status  of  each  document,  they  are  each  classi(cid:196)ed 
under sub-headings as:

1.  Treaties and customary law (where applicable)
2.  UN  and  other  formally  adopted  intergovernmental  guidelines  and 

principles

3.  Humanitarian policy frameworks, guidelines and principles

356

A n n e x   1 :   K e y   D o c u m e n t s   t h a t   i n f o r m   t h e   H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r

1.  Human rights, protection and vulnerability

The  following  documents  relate  primarily  to  the  human  rights  recognised  in 
universal treaties and declarations. A number of key documents relating to age 
(cid:15)children and older people(cid:16), gender and disability are also included because these 
are some of the most common bases of vulnerability in disaster or con(cid:197)ict.

1.1.  Treaties and customary law on human rights, protection 

and vulnerability

Human rights treaty law applies to states that are parties to the relevant treaty, but 
customary law (e.g. the prohibition on torture) applies to all states. Human rights 
law applies at all times, with two possible exceptions:

 - Some limited civil and political rights may be suspended during declared 
national  emergencies,  consistent  with  (cid:40)rticle  (cid:27)  of  the  International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (‘derogation’)

 - (cid:43)uring recognised armed con(cid:197)icts, IHL applies (cid:196)rst if there is any inconsis-

tency with human rights law.

1.1.1.  Universal human rights
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948 (UDHR),  adopted  by  UN 
General Assembly resolution 217 A(III) of 10 December 1948. 
www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/index.shtml

Proclaimed  by  the  (cid:60)N  General  (cid:40)ssembly  in  19(cid:27)(cid:31),  the  (cid:60)(cid:43)HR  set  out,  for  the 
(cid:196)rst time, fundamental human rights to be universally protected. It is not a treaty 
but is generally agreed to have become part of customary international law. The 
(cid:196)rst  sentence  of  the  preamble  introduces  the  concept  of  the  (cid:186)inherent  dignity(cid:187) 
of human beings as a fundamental basis for human rights, and the (cid:196)rst (cid:40)rticle 
states, (cid:186)(cid:40)ll human beings are born free and e(cid:88)ual in dignity and rights.(cid:187)

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966 (ICCPR), adopted 
by (cid:60)N General (cid:40)ssembly resolution (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:40) (cid:15)(cid:63)(cid:63)I(cid:16) of 1(cid:29) (cid:43)ecember 19(cid:29)(cid:29), entry into 
force (cid:25)(cid:26) March 197(cid:29), (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 999, p. 171 and vol. 1(cid:23)(cid:28)7, 
p. 407. www2.ohchr.org/english/law/ccpr.htm

Second  Optional  Protocol  to  ICCPR  1989  (aiming  at  the  abolition  of  the 
death  penalty),  adopted  by  (cid:60)N  General  (cid:40)ssembly  resolution  (cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:22)1(cid:25)(cid:31)  of  1(cid:28) 
(cid:43)ecember 19(cid:31)9, entry into force 11 (cid:49)uly 1991, (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 
1(cid:29)(cid:27)(cid:25), p. (cid:27)1(cid:27). www(cid:25).ohchr.org(cid:22)english(cid:22)law(cid:22)ccpr-death.htm

357

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

States parties to the ICCPR must respect and ensure the rights for all individ-
uals within their territory or under their jurisdiction, while recognising the right of 
‘peoples’ to self-determination and the equal rights of men and women. Some 
rights  (cid:15)marked  with  asterisk(cid:17)(cid:16)  may  never  be  suspended,  even  in  the  most  dire 
national emergency.

Rights: right to life;(cid:17) no torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;(cid:17) 
no slavery;(cid:17) no arbitrary arrest or detention; humanity and dignity in detention; 
no imprisonment for breach of contract;(cid:17) freedom of movement and residence; 
only  lawful  expulsion  of  aliens;  e(cid:88)uality  before  the  law,  fair  trial  and  presump-
tion of innocence in criminal trials; no retrospectivity in criminal offences;(cid:17) e(cid:88)ual 
recognition before the law;(cid:17) private life; free thought, religion and conscience;(cid:17) 
free  opinion,  expression  and  peaceful  assembly;  freedom  of  association;  right 
to marriage and family life; protection of children; right to vote and participate in 
public affairs; minorities(cid:187) right to enjoy their own culture, religion and language.(cid:17)

International  Covenant  on  Economic,  Social  and  Cultural  Rights  1966 
(ICESCR),  adopted  by  UN  General  Assembly  resolution  2200A  (XXI)  of  16 
(cid:43)ecember 19(cid:29)(cid:29), entry into force (cid:26) (cid:49)anuary 197(cid:29), (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty Series, 
vol. 99(cid:26), p. (cid:26) www2.ohchr.org/english/law/cescr.htm

States  parties  agree  to  commit  the  maximum  of  their  available  resources  to 
(cid:186)achieving progressively(cid:187) the covenant rights, which are to be enjoyed e(cid:88)ually by 
men and women.

Rights: to work; to receive just remuneration; to join trade unions; to have social 
security(cid:22)insurance; to family life, including protection of mothers after childbirth and 
protection of children from exploitation; to an ade(cid:88)uate standard of living, including 
food,  clothing  and  housing;  to  physical  and  mental  health;  to  education;  and  to 
participate in cultural life and enjoy the bene(cid:196)ts of scienti(cid:196)c and cultural progress.

International  Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of  Racial 
Discrimination  1969  (ICERD),  adopted  by  (cid:60)N  General  (cid:40)ssembly  resolution 
(cid:25)1(cid:23)(cid:29) (cid:15)(cid:63)(cid:63)(cid:16) of (cid:25)1 (cid:43)ecember 19(cid:29)(cid:28), entry into force (cid:27) (cid:49)anuary 19(cid:29)9, (cid:60)nited Nations, 
Treaty Series, vol. (cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:23), p. 19(cid:28). www(cid:25).ohchr.org(cid:22)english(cid:22)law(cid:22)cerd.htm

Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of  Discrimination  Against 
Women 1979 (CEDAW),  adopted  by  (cid:60)N  General  (cid:40)ssembly  resolution  (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:22)1(cid:31)(cid:23) 
of 1(cid:31) (cid:43)ecember 1979, entry into force (cid:26) September 19(cid:31)1, (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 1(cid:25)(cid:27)9, p. 1(cid:26). www(cid:25).ohchr.org(cid:22)english(cid:22)law(cid:22)cedaw.htm

Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989 (CRC), adopted by (cid:60)N General 
(cid:40)ssembly resolution (cid:27)(cid:27)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:28) of (cid:25)(cid:23) November 19(cid:31)9, entry into force (cid:25) September 

358

A n n e x   1 :   K e y   D o c u m e n t s   t h a t   i n f o r m   t h e   H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r

199(cid:23), (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1(cid:28)77, p. (cid:26).  
www2.ohchr.org/english/law/crc.htm

Optional  Protocol  on  the  involvement  of  children  in  armed  conﬂict  2000, 
adopted  by  (cid:60)N  General  (cid:40)ssembly  resolution  (cid:40)(cid:22)RES(cid:22)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26)  of  (cid:25)(cid:28)  May  (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23), 
entry into force 1(cid:25) February (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. (cid:25)17(cid:26), p. (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25). 
www(cid:25).ohchr.org(cid:22)english(cid:22)law(cid:22)crc-con(cid:197)ict.htm

Optional  Protocol  on  the  sale  of  children,  child  prostitution  and  child 
pornography 2000, adopted by (cid:60)N General (cid:40)ssembly resolution (cid:40)(cid:22)RES(cid:22)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26) 
of (cid:25)(cid:28) May (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:23), entry into force 1(cid:31) (cid:49)anuary (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty Series, 
vol. (cid:25)171, p. (cid:25)(cid:25)7. www(cid:25).ohchr.org(cid:22)english(cid:22)law(cid:22)crc-sale.htm

The CRC has almost universal state accession. It restates the basic human rights 
of children and identi(cid:196)es when they need special protection (cid:15)e.g. when separated 
from their families(cid:16). The protocols re(cid:88)uire positive action on speci(cid:196)c child protec-
tion issues for states that are parties to them.

Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 2006 (CRPD), adopted 
by (cid:60)N General (cid:40)ssembly resolution (cid:40)(cid:22)RES(cid:22)(cid:29)1(cid:22)1(cid:23)(cid:29) of 1(cid:26) (cid:43)ecember (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:29), entry 
into force (cid:26) May (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:60)nited Nations Treaty Collection, Chapter I(cid:61), 1(cid:28). www(cid:25).
ohchr.org/english/law/disabilities-convention.htm

The CRPD supports the rights of people with disabilities under all other human 
rights  treaties,  as  well  as  dealing  speci(cid:196)cally  with  awareness-raising  regarding 
persons  with  disabilities,  non-discrimination  and  accessibility  of  services  and 
facilities.  There  is  also  special  mention  of  ‘situations  of  risk  and  humanitarian 
emergencies’ (Article 11).

1.1.2.  Genocide, torture and other criminal abuse of rights

Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide 
1948, adopted by (cid:60)N General (cid:40)ssembly Resolution (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23) (cid:15)III(cid:16) of 9 (cid:43)ecember 19(cid:27)(cid:31), 
entry into force 1(cid:25) (cid:49)anuary 19(cid:28)1, (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 7(cid:31), p. (cid:25)77 
www2.ohchr.org/english/law/genocide.htm

Convention  against  Torture  and  Other  Cruel,  Inhuman  or  Degrading 
Treatment or Punishment 1984, adopted by UN General Assembly resolution 
(cid:26)9(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:29) of 1(cid:23) (cid:43)ecember 19(cid:31)(cid:27), entry into force (cid:25)(cid:29) (cid:49)une 19(cid:31)7, (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. 1(cid:27)(cid:29)(cid:28), p. (cid:31)(cid:28). www2.ohchr.org/english/law/cat.htm

This  convention  has  a  very  high  number  of  states  parties.  The  prohibition  on 
torture is also now generally recognised as part of customary international law. 
No  kind  of  public  emergency  or  war  may  be  invoked  to  justify  torture.  States 

359

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

must not return (refouler) anyone to a territory where the person has reasonable 
grounds to believe he or she would be in danger of torture.

Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, adopted by the (cid:43)iplomatic 
Conference in Rome, 17 (cid:49)uly 199(cid:31), entry into force 1 (cid:49)uly (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:60)nited Nations, 
Treaty Series, vol. (cid:25)1(cid:31)7, p. (cid:26). www.icrc.org(cid:22)ihl.nsf(cid:22)INTRO(cid:22)(cid:28)(cid:31)(cid:28)(cid:38)Open(cid:43)ocument

(cid:40)rticle 9 of the Statue (cid:15)Elements of Crimes(cid:16), adopted by the International Criminal 
Court  (cid:15)ICC(cid:16)  in  (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25),  describes  in  detail  war  crimes,  crimes  against  humanity 
and genocide, thus codifying much of customary international criminal law. The 
ICC  can  investigate  and  prosecute  matters  referred  to  it  by  the  UN  Security 
Council (cid:15)even if the accused person(cid:187)s state is not a party to the treaty(cid:16), as well 
as crimes allegedly committed by nationals of states parties to the treaty, or in 
their territory.

1.2.  United Nations and other formally adopted intergovernmental 
principles  and  guidelines  on  human  rights,  protection  and 
vulnerability

Madrid  International  Plan  of  Action  on  Ageing  2002,  UN  Second  World 
(cid:40)ssembly on (cid:40)geing, Madrid, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:25), endorsed by (cid:60)N General (cid:40)ssembly resolu-
tion (cid:26)7(cid:22)(cid:28)1 of (cid:26) (cid:43)ecember 19(cid:31)(cid:25). 
www.globalaging.org(cid:22)agingwatch(cid:22)events(cid:22)CS(cid:43)(cid:22)mipaa(cid:18)(cid:28).htm

United  Nations  Principles  for  Older  Persons  1991,  UN  General  Assembly 
Resolution 46/91 of 16 December 1991. 
www2.ohchr.org/english/law/olderpersons.htm

1.3.  Humanitarian policy frameworks, guidelines and principles 

on human rights, protection and vulnerability

Protecting  Persons  Affected  by  Natural  Disasters:  IASC  Operational 
Guidelines  on  Human  Rights  and  Natural  Disasters  2006,  Inter-Agency 
Standing Committee. www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/pageloader.aspx

International Law and Standards Applicable in Natural Disaster Situations 
(IDLO Legal Manual) 2009, International (cid:43)evelopment Law Organi(cid:97)ation (cid:15)I(cid:43)LO(cid:16). 
www.idlo.int(cid:22)(cid:43)OCNews(cid:22)(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25)doc.pdf

360

A n n e x   1 :   K e y   D o c u m e n t s   t h a t   i n f o r m   t h e   H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r

Inter-agency guiding principles on unaccompanied and separated children 
2002,  developed  by  the  ICRC,  the  Of(cid:196)ce  of  the  (cid:60)N  High  Commissioner  for 
Refugees (cid:15)(cid:60)NHCR(cid:16), the (cid:60)N Children(cid:187)s Fund (cid:15)(cid:60)NICEF(cid:16), World (cid:61)ision International, 
Save the Children (cid:60)(cid:50) and the International Rescue Committee, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9. www.icrc.
org

Gender  Handbook  in  Humanitarian  Action  2006,  Inter-(cid:40)gency  Standing 
Committee. 
www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/pageloader.aspx?page=content- 
subsidi-tf(cid:70)gender-genderh

IASC Guidelines on Mental Health and Psychosocial Support in Emergency 
Settings  2007,  Inter-(cid:40)gency  Standing  Committee.  www.humanitarianinfo.org/
iasc(cid:22)pageloader.aspx(cid:38)page(cid:36)content-subsidi-tf(cid:70)mhps-default

INEE  Minimum  Standards  for  Education  in  Emergencies,  Chronic  Crises 
and Early Reconstruction 2007, as updated 2010, Inter-(cid:40)gency Network for 
Education in Emergencies (INEE) (formally recognised as companion standards 
with Sphere since 2008). 
www.ineesite.org(cid:22)index.php(cid:22)post(cid:22)inee(cid:70)minimum(cid:70)standards(cid:70)overview(cid:22)

2.  Armed conﬂict, international humanitarian law and 

humanitarian assistance

2.1.  Treaties and customary law on armed conﬂict, international 

humanitarian law and humanitarian assistance

International  humanitarian  law  (cid:15)IHL(cid:16)  speci(cid:196)es  the  thresholds  of  when  violent 
con(cid:197)ict  becomes  (cid:186)armed  con(cid:197)ict(cid:187)  and  thus  makes  this  special  legal  regime 
applicable. The International Committee of the Red Cross (cid:15)ICRC(cid:16) is the of(cid:196)cial 
repository of the IHL treaties, and provides extensive information and resources 
on its website (cid:15)www.icrc.org(cid:16), including the of(cid:196)cial commentary on the Geneva 
Conventions  and  their  Protocols,  and  the  rules  of  the  Customary  International 
Humanitarian Law Study.

2.1.1.  Core IHL treaties

The Four Geneva Conventions of 1949
Protocol  Additional  to  the  Geneva  Conventions,  Protection  of  Victims  of 
International Armed Conﬂicts 1977 (Protocol I)
Protocol  Additional  to  the  Geneva  Conventions,  Protection  of  Victims  of 
Non-International Armed Conﬂicts 1977 (Protocol II)
www.icrc.org(cid:22)ihl.nsf(cid:22)CON(cid:61)PRES(cid:38)Open(cid:61)iew

361

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The four Geneva Conventions – to which all states are parties and which are also 
generally accepted as part of customary law – concern protection and treatment 
of the wounded and sick in land warfare (cid:15)I(cid:16) and at sea (cid:15)II(cid:16), treatment of prisoners of 
war (cid:15)III(cid:16) and protection of civilians during armed con(cid:197)ict (cid:15)I(cid:61)(cid:16). They apply primarily 
to  international  armed  con(cid:197)icts,  except  for  (cid:40)rticle  (cid:26)  common  to  the  conven-
tions which concerns non-international con(cid:197)icts, and some other elements now 
accepted as customary law in non-international con(cid:197)icts. The two 1977 protocols 
updated  the  conventions  at  that  time,  especially  the  de(cid:196)nitions  of  combatants 
and codifying of non-international con(cid:197)icts. (cid:40) number of states have not acceded 
to the protocols.

2.1.2.  Treaties  on  restricted  or  prohibited  weapons  and  cultural 

property

In addition to the (cid:186)Geneva law(cid:187) outlined above, there is also the body of law often 
described  as  the  (cid:186)Hague  law(cid:187)  on  armed  con(cid:197)ict.  This  includes  the  convention 
on protection of cultural property and a number of conventions on the types of 
weapons  that  are  restricted  or  prohibited,  including  gases  and  other  chemical 
and biological weapons, conventional weapons that are indiscriminate or cause 
unnecessary  suffering,  as  well  as  anti-personnel  landmines  and  cluster  muni-
tions. www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf

2.1.3.    Customary IHL

Customary  IHL  refers  to  the  law  of  armed  con(cid:197)ict  that  is  accepted  by  states, 
through their statements, policies and practices, as representing customary rules 
that apply to all states, regardless of their accession to the IHL treaties. There is 
no agreed list of customary rules, but the most authoritative interpretation is the 
study below.

Customary International Humanitarian Law (CIHL) Study, ICRC, Henckaerts, 
(cid:49)-M and (cid:43)oswald-(cid:41)eck, L, Cambridge (cid:60)niversity Press, Cambridge (cid:13) New (cid:64)ork, 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28). www.icrc.org/ihl.nsf/INTRO/612?OpenDocument

The study covers almost the full ambit of the law of armed con(cid:197)ict. It lists 1(cid:29)1 
speci(cid:196)c  rules  and  whether  each  applies  in  international  armed  con(cid:197)ict  and(cid:22)or 
non-international  armed  con(cid:197)ict.  While  some  legal  commentators  criticise  its 
methodology, the CIHL study emerged from a broadly consultative and rigorous 
research  process  over  ten  years,  and  its  authority  as  an  interpretation  of  the 
customary rules is widely recognised.

362

A n n e x   1 :   K e y   D o c u m e n t s   t h a t   i n f o r m   t h e   H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r

2.2.  UN  and  other  formally  adopted 

intergovernmental 
principles and guidelines on armed conﬂict, international 
humanitarian law and humanitarian assistance

UN Security Council ‘Aide Memoire’ on Protection 2002, as updated 2003 
(S/PRST/2003/27). www.un.org(cid:22)(cid:43)ocs(cid:22)journal(cid:22)asp(cid:22)ws.asp(cid:38)m(cid:36)S(cid:22)PRST(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:26)(cid:22)(cid:25)7
This  is  not  a  resolution  binding  on  states,  but  a  guidance  document  for  the 
(cid:60)N Security Council relating to peacekeeping and urgent situations of con(cid:197)ict, 
resulting from consultations with a range of UN agencies and IASC.

UN Security Council resolutions on sexual violence and women in armed 
conﬂict, especially resolution numbers 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1889 
(2009)
All UN Security Council resolutions by year and number: 
www.un.org/documents/scres.htm

2.3.  Humanitarian  policy 

frameworks,  guidelines  and 
principles on armed conﬂict, international humanitarian 
law and humanitarian assistance

Professional standards for protection work carried out by humanitarian and 
human rights actors in armed conﬂict and other situations of violence 2009, 
ICRC. www.icrc.org

3.  Refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs)

UNHCR – the UN Refugee Agency – has a special legal mandate for the protec-
tion of refugees under the Refugee Convention and Protocol. It has also been 
mandated by the UN General Assembly to liaise with states for the protection of 
IDPs. UNHCR has extensive resources on its website.

3.1.  Treaties on refugees and IDPs
In  addition  to  the  international  treaty,  this  section  includes  two  (cid:40)frican  (cid:60)nion 
(cid:15)formerly Organi(cid:97)ation of (cid:40)frican (cid:60)nity, or O(cid:40)(cid:60)(cid:16) treaties, because they both set 
historic precedents.

Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 1951 (as amended), adopted 
by United Nations Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Status of Refugees and 
Stateless  Persons,  Geneva,  (cid:25)  to  (cid:25)(cid:28)  (cid:49)uly  19(cid:28)1,  entry  into  force  (cid:25)(cid:25)  (cid:40)pril  19(cid:28)(cid:27), 
(cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1(cid:31)9, p. 1(cid:26)7.

363

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees 1967, noted by the (cid:60)N General 
(cid:40)ssembly, in resolution (cid:25)19(cid:31) (cid:15)(cid:63)(cid:63)I(cid:16) (cid:25) of 1(cid:29) (cid:43)ecember 19(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty 
Series, vol. (cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:29), p. (cid:25)(cid:29)7. www.unhcr.org(cid:22)protect(cid:22)PROTECTION(cid:22)(cid:26)b(cid:29)(cid:29)c(cid:25)aa1(cid:23).pdf

The (cid:196)rst international agreement on refugees, the Convention de(cid:196)nes a refugee 
as a person who, (cid:186)owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons 
of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political 
opinion, is outside the country of his nationality, and is unable to or, owing to such 
fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country or return there 
because there is a fear of persecution...’

OAU Convention Governing the Speciﬁc Aspects of Refugee Problems in 
Africa 1969, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government at its 
Sixth Ordinary Session, (cid:40)ddis (cid:40)baba, 1(cid:23) September 19(cid:29)9.
www.unhcr.org(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:28)dc1a(cid:29)(cid:31)(cid:25).html

This accepts and expands the 19(cid:28)1 Convention de(cid:196)nition to include people who 
have been compelled to leave their country not only as a result of persecution but 
also owing to external aggression, occupation, foreign domination or events seri-
ously disturbing public order. It also recognises non-state groups as perpetrators 
of persecution and it does not require that refugees show a direct link between 
themselves and the future danger.

African  Union  Convention  for  the  Protection  and  Assistance  of  Internally 
Displaced  Persons  in  Africa  (Kampala  Convention)  2009,  adopted  by  a 
Special Summit of the (cid:40)frican (cid:60)nion, held in (cid:50)ampala, (cid:60)ganda, on (cid:25)(cid:25) October 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9, not yet in force as at October (cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23). www.unhcr.org/4ae9bede9.html

This is the (cid:196)rst multilateral convention concerning I(cid:43)Ps. It was initially signed by 
17 (cid:40)frican (cid:60)nion states in October (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)9 but re(cid:88)uires 1(cid:28) formal accessions(cid:22)rati(cid:196)-
cations to enter into force.

3.2.   UN  and  other  formally  adopted 

intergovernmental 

principles and guidelines on refugees and IDPs

Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement 1998, recognised in September 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28)  by  heads  of  state  and  governments  assembled  at  the  World  Summit  in 
New (cid:64)ork in (cid:60)N General (cid:40)ssembly resolution (cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:22)L.1 (cid:15)1(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:60)N (cid:43)oc. (cid:40)(cid:22)(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:22)L.1(cid:16) as 
‘an  important  international  framework  for  the  protection  of  internally  displaced 
persons’. www.idpguidingprinciples.org/

These principles are based on international humanitarian and human rights law 
and analogous refugee law, and are intended to serve as an international standard 
to guide governments, international organisations and all other relevant actors in 
providing assistance and protection to IDPs.

364

A n n e x   1 :   K e y   D o c u m e n t s   t h a t   i n f o r m   t h e   H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r

4.  Disasters and humanitarian assistance

4.1.  Treaties on disasters and humanitarian assistance
Convention  on  the  Safety  of  United  Nations  and  Associated  Personnel 
1994, adopted by (cid:60)N General (cid:40)ssembly resolution (cid:27)9(cid:22)(cid:28)9 of 9 (cid:43)ecember 199(cid:27), 
entry into force 1(cid:28) (cid:49)anuary 1999, (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28)1, p. (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26).
www.un.org/law/cod/safety.htm

Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and 
Associated  Personnel  2005,  adopted  by  UN  General  Assembly  resolution 
(cid:40)(cid:22)(cid:29)(cid:23)(cid:22)(cid:27)(cid:25) of (cid:31) (cid:43)ecember (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28), entry into force 19 (cid:40)ugust (cid:25)(cid:23)1(cid:23). 
www.ocha.unog.ch/drptoolkit/PNormativeGuidanceInternationalConventions.
html(cid:10)(cid:60)NSpeci(cid:196)cConventions

In the convention, protection is limited to (cid:60)N peacekeeping, unless the (cid:60)N has 
declared ‘exceptional risk’ – an impractical requirement. The protocol corrects 
this major (cid:197)aw in the convention and expands the legal protection to all (cid:60)N opera-
tions, from emergency humanitarian assistance to peacebuilding and the delivery 
of humanitarian, political and development assistance.

Food  Aid  Convention  1999,  a  separate  legal  instrument  under  the  Grains 
Trade Convention 199(cid:28), administered by the Food (cid:40)id Committee through the 
Secretariat of the International Grains Council (IGC).

Tampere  Convention  on  the  Provision  of  Telecommunication  Resources 
for  Disaster  Mitigation  and  Relief  Operations  1998,  approved  by  the 
Intergovernmental Conference on Emergency Telecommunications 199(cid:31), entry 
into force (cid:31) (cid:49)anuary (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:60)nited Nations, Treaty Series, vol. (cid:25)(cid:25)9(cid:29), p. (cid:28).
www.unhcr.org(cid:22)refworld(cid:22)publisher,ICET9(cid:31),,,(cid:27)1dec(cid:28)9d(cid:27),(cid:23).html

UN  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  1992  (UNFCCC),  adopted 
by  the  (cid:60)nited  Nations  Conference  on  Environment  and  (cid:43)evelopment,  Rio  de 
(cid:49)aneiro, (cid:27) to 1(cid:27) (cid:49)une 199(cid:25), welcomed by the (cid:60)N General (cid:40)ssembly in resolution 
(cid:27)7(cid:22)19(cid:28) of (cid:25)(cid:25) (cid:43)ecember 199(cid:25), entry into force (cid:25)1 March 199(cid:27), (cid:60)nited Nations, 
Treaty Series, vol. 1771, p. 1(cid:23)7. 
http:(cid:22)(cid:22)unfccc.int(cid:22)essential(cid:70)background(cid:22)convention(cid:22)items(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:25)7.php

Kyoto  Protocol  to  the  UNFCC  1997,  adopted  at  the  third  session  of  the 
Conference  of  the  Parties  to  the  Framework  Convention,  (cid:50)yoto,  (cid:49)apan  on  11 
(cid:43)ecember  1997,  entry  into  force  1(cid:29)  February  (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28),  (cid:60)nited  Nations,  Treaty 
Series, vol. (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26), p. 1(cid:27)(cid:31). http:(cid:22)(cid:22)unfccc.int(cid:22)essential(cid:70)background(cid:22)kyoto(cid:70)protocol(cid:22)
items/1678.php

365

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The  (cid:60)NFCCC  and  (cid:50)yoto  Protocol  address  the  urgent  need  for  implementing 
climate  change  adaptation  and  risk  reduction  strategies,  and  building  local 
capacity and resilience, especially in countries that are prone to natural disasters. 
It emphasises disaster reduction strategies and risk management, especially with 
regard to climate change.

4.2.  UN  and  other  formally  adopted 

intergovernmental 
principles and guidelines on disasters and humanitarian 
assistance

Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian emergency assistance 
of  the  United  Nations,  with  Annex,  Guiding  Principles,  General  (cid:40)ssembly 
Resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991.
www.reliefweb.int(cid:22)ocha(cid:70)ol(cid:22)about(cid:22)resol(cid:22)resol(cid:70)e.html

This  led  to  the  creation  of  the  (cid:60)N  (cid:43)epartment  of  Humanitarian  (cid:40)ffairs,  which 
became the (cid:60)N Of(cid:196)ce for the Coordination of Humanitarian (cid:40)ffairs (cid:15)OCH(cid:40)(cid:16) in 199(cid:31).

Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the resilience of nations 
and communities to disasters, adopted by the World Conference on Disaster 
Reduction (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:28). www.unisdr.org/eng/hfa/hfa.htm
This  sets  out  strategies  for  states  and  humanitarian  agencies  to  incorporate 
disaster risk reduction in the implementation of emergency response, recovery 
and preparedness programmes, integrate it in sustainable development and build 
capacity for resilience.

Guidelines  for  the  domestic  facilitation  and  regulation  of  international 
disaster  relief  and  initial  recovery  assistance,  (IDRL  Guidelines)  2007, 
adopted by the (cid:26)(cid:23)th International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent 
(which includes states parties to the Geneva Conventions).
www.ifrc.org/what/disasters/idrl/index.asp

4.3.  Humanitarian  policy 

frameworks,  guidelines  and 

principles on disasters and humanitarian assistance

Code  of  Conduct  for  The  International  Red  Cross  and  Red  Crescent 
Movement and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) in Disaster Relief 
(cid:15)see (cid:40)nnex (cid:25): Code of Conduct on page (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:31)(cid:16).

Fundamental Principles of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement 1965, adopted by the (cid:25)(cid:23)th International Conference of the Red Cross.
www.ifrc.org/what/values/principles/index.asp

366

A n n e x   1 :   K e y   D o c u m e n t s   t h a t   i n f o r m   t h e   H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r

in  Humanitarian  Accountability  2007,  Humanitarian 
HAP  Standards 
Accountability Partnership (an international self-regulatory body for the humani-
tarian sector, including certi(cid:196)cation(cid:16). www.hapinternational.org

Principles and Good Practice of Humanitarian Donorship 2003,  endorsed 
by  the  Stockholm  conference  of  donor  countries,  (cid:60)N  agencies,  NGOs  and 
the  International  Red  Cross  and  Red  Crescent  Movement,  and  signed  by  the 
European Commission and 16 states. www.goodhumanitariandonorship.org

Principles  of  Partnership:  A  Statement  of  Commitment  2007,  endorsed  at 
the  (cid:49)uly  (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23)7  Global  Humanitarian  Platform  meeting  (cid:15)a  dialogue  mechanism 
between UN and non-UN humanitarian organisations). 
www.globalhumanitarianplatform.org/ghp.html

367

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

Annex 2
The Code of Conduct  
for the International Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Movement and Non-Governmental 
Organisations (NGOs) in Disaster Relief
Prepared jointly by the International Federation of Red Cross and  
Red Crescent Societies and the International Committee of the Red Cross1

1 

 Sponsored by: Caritas Internationalis,* Catholic Relief Services,* International Federation of Red Cross 
and Red Crescent Societies,* International Save the Children Alliance,* Lutheran World Federation,* 
Oxfam,* World Council of Churches,* International Committee of the Red Cross (* members of the Steering 
Committee for Humanitarian Response).

368

A n n e x   2 :   C o d e   o f   C o n d u c t

Purpose

This Code of Conduct seeks to guard our standards of behaviour. It is not about 
operational details, such as how one should calculate food rations or set up a 
refugee camp. Rather, it seeks to maintain the high standards of independence, 
effectiveness and impact to which disaster response NGOs and the International 
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement aspires. It is a voluntary code, enforced 
by the will of the organisation accepting it to maintain the standards laid down in 
the Code.

In the event of armed con(cid:197)ict, the present Code of Conduct will be interpreted 
and applied in conformity with international humanitarian law.

The  Code  of  Conduct  is  presented  (cid:196)rst.  (cid:40)ttached  to  it  are  three  annexes, 
describing the working environment that we would like to see created by Host 
Governments,  (cid:43)onor  Governments  and  Inter-governmental  Organisations  in 
order to facilitate the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance.

Deﬁnitions

NGOs:  NGOs  (cid:15)Non-Governmental  Organisations(cid:16)  refers  here  to  organisations, 
both national and international, which are constituted separately from the govern-
ment of the country in which they are founded. 

NGHAs: For the purposes of this text, the term Non-Governmental Humanitarian 
Agencies  (NGHAs)  has  been  coined  to  encompass  the  components  of  the 
International  Red  Cross  and  Red  Crescent  Movement  –  The  International 
Committee of the Red Cross, The International Federation of Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies and its member National Societies (cid:182) and the NGOs as de(cid:196)ned 
above. This code refers speci(cid:196)cally to those NGH(cid:40)s who are involved in disaster 
response.

IGOs:  IGOs  (Inter-Governmental  Organisations)  refers  to  organisations  consti-
tuted by two or more governments. It thus includes all United Nations Agencies 
and regional organisations.

Disasters: (cid:40) disaster is a calamitous event resulting in loss of life, great human 
suffering and distress, and large scale material damage.

369

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

The Code of Conduct 
Principles of Conduct for The International Red Cross 
and Red Crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster 
Response Programmes

1 The humanitarian imperative comes ﬁrst

The  right  to  receive  humanitarian  assistance,  and  to  offer  it,  is  a  fundamental 
humanitarian principle which should be enjoyed by all citizens of all countries. As 
members of the international community, we recognise our obligation to provide 
humanitarian assistance wherever it is needed. Hence the need for unimpeded 
access to affected populations is of fundamental importance in exercising that 
responsibility.  The  prime  motivation  of  our  response  to  disaster  is  to  alleviate 
human  suffering  amongst  those  least  able  to  withstand  the  stress  caused  by 
disaster. When we give humanitarian aid it is not a partisan or political act and 
should not be viewed as such. 

2 Aid is given regardless of the race, creed or nationality of the recipients 
and without adverse distinction of any kind. Aid priorities are calculated on 
the basis of need alone 

Wherever  possible,  we  will  base  the  provision  of  relief  aid  upon  a  thorough 
assessment of the needs of the disaster victims and the local capacities already in 
place to meet those needs. Within the entirety of our programmes, we will re(cid:197)ect 
considerations of proportionality. Human suffering must be alleviated whenever 
it is found; life is as precious in one part of a country as another. Thus, our provi-
sion of aid will re(cid:197)ect the degree of suffering it seeks to alleviate. In implementing 
this approach, we recognise the crucial role played by women in disaster-prone 
communities and will ensure that this role is supported, not diminished, by our aid 
programmes. The implementation of such a universal, impartial and independent 
policy, can only be effective if we and our partners have access to the neces-
sary resources to provide for such e(cid:88)uitable relief, and have e(cid:88)ual access to all 
disaster victims. 

3 Aid will not be used to further a particular political or religious standpoint

Humanitarian aid will be given according to the need of individuals, families and 
communities. Not withstanding the right of NGHAs to espouse particular polit-
ical or religious opinions, we af(cid:196)rm that assistance will not be dependent on the 
adherence of the recipients to those opinions. We will not tie the promise, delivery 
or distribution of assistance to the embracing or acceptance of a particular polit-
ical or religious creed.

370

A n n e x   2 :   C o d e   o f   C o n d u c t

4 We shall endeavour not to act as instruments of government foreign policy

NGHAs are agencies which act independently from governments. We therefore 
formulate  our  own  policies  and  implementation  strategies  and  do  not  seek  to 
implement  the  policy  of  any  government,  except  in  so  far  as  it  coincides  with 
our own independent policy. We will never knowingly – or through negligence – 
allow ourselves, or our employees, to be used to gather information of a political, 
military  or  economically  sensitive  nature  for  governments  or  other  bodies  that 
may  serve  purposes  other  than  those  which  are  strictly  humanitarian,  nor  will 
we act as instruments of foreign policy of donor governments. We will use the 
assistance we receive to respond to needs and this assistance should not be 
driven by the need to dispose of donor commodity surpluses, nor by the political 
interest  of  any  particular  donor.  We  value  and  promote  the  voluntary  giving  of 
labour and (cid:196)nances by concerned individuals to support our work and recog-
nise the independence of action promoted by such voluntary motivation. In order 
to protect our independence we will seek to avoid dependence upon a single 
funding source.

5 We shall respect culture and custom

We will endeavour to respect the culture, structures and customs of the commu-
nities and countries we are working in. 

6 We shall attempt to build disaster response on local capacities

All people and communities – even in disaster – possess capacities as well as 
vulnerabilities. Where possible, we will strengthen these capacities by employing 
local staff, purchasing local materials and trading with local companies. Where 
possible, we will work through local NGH(cid:40)s as partners in planning and imple-
mentation, and co-operate with local government structures where appropriate. 
We  will  place  a  high  priority  on  the  proper  co-ordination  of  our  emergency 
responses.  This  is  best  done  within  the  countries  concerned  by  those  most 
directly involved in the relief operations, and should include representatives of the 
relevant UN bodies.

7 Ways shall be found to involve programme beneﬁciaries in the manage-
ment of relief aid

(cid:43)isaster response assistance should never be imposed upon the bene(cid:196)ciaries. 
Effective relief and lasting rehabilitation can best be achieved where the intended 
bene(cid:196)ciaries are involved in the design, management and implementation of the 
assistance programme. We will strive to achieve full community participation in 
our relief and rehabilitation programmes.

371

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

8 Relief aid must strive to reduce future vulnerabilities to disaster as well as 
meeting basic needs

(cid:40)ll  relief  actions  affect  the  prospects  for  long-term  development,  either  in  a 
positive or a negative fashion. Recognising this, we will strive to implement relief 
programmes which actively reduce the bene(cid:196)ciaries(cid:187) vulnerability to future disas-
ters and help create sustainable lifestyles. We will pay particular attention to envi-
ronmental concerns in the design and management of relief programmes. We 
will also endeavour to minimise the negative impact of humanitarian assistance, 
seeking to avoid long-term bene(cid:196)ciary dependence upon external aid.

9 We hold ourselves accountable to both those we seek to assist and those 
from whom we accept resources

We often act as an institutional link in the partnership between those who wish 
to  assist  and  those  who  need  assistance  during  disasters.  We  therefore  hold 
ourselves accountable to both constituencies. All our dealings with donors and 
bene(cid:196)ciaries shall re(cid:197)ect an attitude of openness and transparency. We recog-
nise the need to report on our activities, both from a (cid:196)nancial perspective and the 
perspective of effectiveness. We recognise the obligation to ensure appropriate 
monitoring of aid distributions and to carry out regular assessments of the impact 
of  disaster  assistance.  We  will  also  seek  to  report,  in  an  open  fashion,  upon 
the impact of our work, and the factors limiting or enhancing that impact. Our 
programmes will be based upon high standards of professionalism and expertise 
in order to minimise the wasting of valuable resources.

10 In our information, publicity and advertising activities, we shall recog-
nise disaster victims as digniﬁed humans, not hopeless objects

Respect for the disaster victim as an equal partner in action should never be lost. 
In our public information we shall portray an objective image of the disaster situa-
tion where the capacities and aspirations of disaster victims are highlighted, and 
not just their vulnerabilities and fears. While we will cooperate with the media in 
order to enhance public response, we will not allow external or internal demands 
for  publicity  to  take  precedence  over  the  principle  of  maximising  overall  relief 
assistance. We will avoid competing with other disaster response agencies for 
media coverage in situations where such coverage may be to the detriment of 
the  service  provided  to  the  bene(cid:196)ciaries  or  to  the  security  of  our  staff  or  the 
bene(cid:196)ciaries.

372

A n n e x   2 :   C o d e   o f   C o n d u c t

The Working Environment
Having agreed unilaterally to strive to abide by the Code laid out above, we present 
below  some  indicative  guidelines  which  describe  the  working  environment  we 
would like to see created by donor governments, host governments and the inter-
governmental organisations – principally the agencies of the United Nations – in 
order to facilitate the effective participation of NGHAs in disaster response.

These guidelines are presented for guidance. They are not legally binding, nor do 
we expect governments and IGOs to indicate their acceptance of the guidelines 
through the signature of any document, although this may be a goal to work to in 
the future. They are presented in a spirit of openness and cooperation so that our 
partners will become aware of the ideal relationship we would seek with them.

Annex I: Recommendations to the governments of 
disaster affected countries

1  Governments  should  recognise  and  respect  the  independent,  humani-
tarian and impartial actions of NGHAs 

NGHAs are independent bodies. This independence and impartiality should be 
respected by host governments.

2 Host governments should facilitate rapid access to disaster victims for 
NGHAs

If  NGH(cid:40)s  are  to  act  in  full  compliance  with  their  humanitarian  principles,  they 
should be granted rapid and impartial access to disaster victims, for the purpose 
of delivering humanitarian assistance. It is the duty of the host government, as 
part of the exercising of sovereign responsibility, not to block such assistance, 
and to accept the impartial and apolitical action of NGHAs. Host governments 
should  facilitate  the  rapid  entry  of  relief  staff,  particularly  by  waiving  re(cid:88)uire-
ments for transit, entry and exit visas, or arranging that these are rapidly granted. 
Governments should grant over-(cid:197)ight permission and landing rights for aircraft 
transporting  international  relief  supplies  and  personnel,  for  the  duration  of  the 
emergency relief phase. 

3 Governments should facilitate the timely ﬂow of relief goods and informa-
tion during disasters

Relief supplies and equipment are brought into a country solely for the purpose 
of alleviating human suffering, not for commercial bene(cid:196)t or gain. Such supplies 

373

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

should  normally  be  allowed  free  and  unrestricted  passage  and  should  not  be 
subject to re(cid:88)uirements for consular certi(cid:196)cates of origin or invoices, import and(cid:22)
or export licences or other restrictions, or to importation taxation, landing fees or 
port charges.

The temporary importation of necessary relief e(cid:88)uipment, including vehicles, light 
aircraft and telecommunications e(cid:88)uipment, should be facilitated by the receiving 
host government through the temporary waving of licence or registration restric-
tions. E(cid:88)ually, governments should not restrict the re-exportation of relief e(cid:88)uip-
ment at the end of a relief operation.

To  facilitate  disaster  communications,  host  governments  are  encouraged  to 
designate certain radio fre(cid:88)uencies, which relief organisations may use in-country 
and  for  international  communications  for  the  purpose  of  disaster  communica-
tions, and to make such fre(cid:88)uencies known to the disaster response community 
prior to the disaster. They should authorise relief personnel to utilise all means of 
communication required for their relief operations.

4 Governments should seek to provide a coordinated disaster information 
and planning service

The overall planning and coordination of relief efforts is ultimately the responsi-
bility of the host government. Planning and coordination can be greatly enhanced 
if NGHAs are provided with information on relief needs and government systems 
for  planning  and  implementing  relief  efforts  as  well  as  information  on  potential 
security risks they may encounter. Governments are urged to provide such infor-
mation to NGHAs.

To facilitate effective coordination and the ef(cid:196)cient utilisation of relief efforts, host 
governments are urged to designate, prior to disaster, a single point-of-contact 
for incoming NGHAs to liaise with the national authorities.

5 Disaster relief in the event of armed conﬂict

In the event of armed con(cid:197)ict, relief actions are governed by the relevant provi-
sions of international humanitarian law.

Annex II: Recommendations to donor governments

1  Donor  governments  should  recognise  and  respect  the  independent, 
humanitarian and impartial actions of NGHAs

374

A n n e x   2 :   C o d e   o f   C o n d u c t

NGHAs are independent bodies whose independence and impartiality should be 
respected by donor governments. Donor governments should not use NGHAs to 
further any political or ideological aim.

2 Donor governments should provide funding with a guarantee of opera-
tional independence

NGHAs accept funding and material assistance from donor governments in the 
same spirit as they render it to disaster victims; one of humanity and indepen-
dence of action. The implementation of relief actions is ultimately the responsi-
bility of the NGHA and will be carried out according to the policies of that NGHA.

3  Donor  governments  should  use  their  good  ofﬁces  to  assist  NGHAs  in 
obtaining access to disaster victims

Donor  governments  should  recognise  the  importance  of  accepting  a  level  of 
responsibility for the security and freedom of access of NGHA staff to disaster 
sites. They should be prepared to exercise diplomacy with host governments on 
such issues if necessary.

Annex III: Recommendations to inter-governmental 
organisations

1 IGOs should recognise NGHAs, local and foreign, as valuable partners

NGHAs  are  willing  to  work  with  UN  and  other  inter-governmental  agencies 
to  effect  better  disaster  response.  They  do  so  in  a  spirit  of  partnership  which 
respects  the  integrity  and  independence  of  all  partners.  Inter-governmental 
agencies must respect the independence and impartiality of the NGHAs. NGHAs 
should be consulted by UN agencies in the preparation of relief plans.

2 IGOs should assist host governments in providing an overall coordinating 
framework for international and local disaster relief

NGHAs  do  not  usually  have  the  mandate  to  provide  the  overall  coordinating 
framework  for  disasters  which  require  an  international  response.  This  respon-
sibility falls to the host government and the relevant United Nations authorities. 
They are urged to provide this service in a timely and effective manner to serve 
the affected state and the national and international disaster response commu-
nity. In any case, NGH(cid:40)s should make all efforts to ensure the effective co-ordi-
nation of their own services. 

375

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

In the event of armed con(cid:197)ict, relief actions are governed by the relevant provi-
sions of international humanitarian law.

3 IGOs should extend security protection provided for UN organisations, 
to NGHAs

Where security services are provided for inter-governmental organisations, this 
service  should  be  extended  to  their  operational  NGHA  partners  where  it  is  so 
requested.

4 IGOs should provide NGHAs with the same access to relevant information 
as is granted to UN organisations

IGOs are urged to share all information, pertinent to the implementation of effec-
tive disaster response, with their operational NGH(cid:40) partners.

376

A n n e x   3 :   A b b r e v i a t i o n s   a n d   A c r o n y m s

Annex 3 
Abbreviations 
and Acronyms

ACT 
ALNAP 

ART 
(cid:40)R(cid:61) 
BCPR 
BEmOC 
BMI 
BMS 
BTS 
CDC 
CE-DAT 
CEDAW 

CEmOC 
CFR 
CHW 
CIHL 
cm 
CMR 
CRC 
CRPD 
CRS 

artemisinin-based combination therapy 
Active  Learning  Network  for  Accountability  and  Performance  in 
Humanitarian Action
anti-retroviral therapy
anti-retroviral
Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery (UNDP)
basic emergency obstetric care
body mass index
breastmilk substitutes
blood transfusion service
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Complex Emergency Database
Convention  on  the  Elimination  of  All  Forms  of  Discrimination 
Against Women
comprehensive emergency obstetric care
case fatality rate
Community Health Worker
Customary International Humanitarian Law
centimetre
crude mortality rate 
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Catholic Relief Services

377

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

CTC 
DAC 
(cid:43)PT 
ECB 
ENA 
EPI 
ET(cid:40)T 
EWARN 
FANTA 
FAO 
FTE 
GMO 
HAP 
HIS 
IASC 
ICC 
ICCPR 
ICERD 

ICESCR 
ICRC 
IC(cid:61)(cid:40) 
IDLO 
IDP 
IFE 
IFPRI 
IFRC 
IGC 
IHL 
IMAI 
IMCI 
IMPAC 
INEE 
IPC 
IRC 
IRS 
ISPO 

cholera treatment centre
Development Assistance Committee
diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus
Emergency Capacity Building (Project)
Emergency Nutrition Assessment
Expanded Programme on Immunization
Emergency Triage, (cid:40)ssessment and Treatment
early warning
Food and Nutrition Technical Assistance
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
full-time equivalent
genetically modi(cid:196)ed organism 
Humanitarian Accountability Partnership
health information system
Inter-Agency Standing Committee
International Criminal Court
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
International Committee of the Red Cross
International Council of (cid:61)oluntary (cid:40)gencies
International Development Law Organization
internally displaced person
infant feeding in emergencies 
International Food Policy Research Institute
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
International Grains Council 
international humanitarian law
Integrated Management of Adult Illness
Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses
Integrated Management of Pregnancy and Childbirth
Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies
infection prevention and control
International Rescue Committee
indoor residual spraying 
International Society for Prosthetics and Orthotics

378

IYCF 
km 
LBW 
LEDS 
LEGS 
LLIN 
MISP 
MOH 
MSF 
MUAC 
NCDs 
NCHS 
NFI 
NGO 
NICS 
NRC 
NTU 
OAU 
OCH(cid:40) 
OECD 
OHCHR 

ORS 
PAHO 
PEP 
PLHI(cid:61) 
PLWH(cid:40) 
PMTCT 
PoUWT 
(cid:56)(cid:13)(cid:40) 
RH 
RNI 
SCM 
SEEP 
S(cid:50)(cid:40)T 
SMART 

A n n e x   3 :   A b b r e v i a t i o n s   a n d   A c r o n y m s

infant and young child feeding
kilometre
low birth weight
light-emitting diodes
Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards
long-lasting insecticide-treated net
Minimum Initial Service Package
Ministry of Health
Médecins sans Frontières
mid upper arm conference
non-communicable diseases
National Center for Health Statistics 
non-food item
non-governmental organisation
Nutrition in Crisis Information System
Norwegian Refugee Council
nephelolometric turbidity units
Organization of African Unity (now African Union)
(cid:60)nited Nations Of(cid:196)ce for the Coordination of Humanitarian (cid:40)ffairs
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Of(cid:196)ce  of  the  (cid:60)nited  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Human 
Rights
oral rehydration salts
Pan American Health Organization
post-exposure prophylaxis
people living with HI(cid:61)
people living with HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S
prevention of mother-to-child transmission (cid:15)of HI(cid:61)(cid:16)
point-of-use water treatment
(cid:88)uality and accountability
reproductive health
reference nutrient intakes 
supply chain management
Small Enterprise Education and Promotion (Network)
Swiss Centre for (cid:40)ppropriate Technology
Standardised  Monitoring  and  Assessment  of  Relief  and 
Transitions

379

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

sexually transmitted infections
tuberculosis
tetanus immune globulin
under-(cid:28) mortality rate
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
United Nations
(cid:49)oint (cid:60)nited Nations Programme on HI(cid:61)(cid:22)(cid:40)I(cid:43)S
(cid:60)nited Nations (cid:43)isarmament, (cid:43)emobili(cid:97)ation and Reintegration 
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
United Nations Population Fund

STIs 
TB 
TIG 
(cid:60)(cid:28)MR 
UDHR 
UN 
(cid:60)N(cid:40)I(cid:43)S 
(cid:60)N-(cid:43)(cid:43)R 
UNDP 
UNFCCC 
UNFPA 
UN-Habitat  United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(cid:60)NHCR 

Of(cid:196)ce of the (cid:60)nited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (cid:15)(cid:60)N 
Refugee Agency)
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
United States Agency for International Development
vulnerability and capacity analysis
ventilated improved pit (cid:15)latrine(cid:16)
water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion
Water, Engineering and (cid:43)evelopment Centre 
weight for height
World Food Programme
World Health Assembly
World Health Organization
water safety plan 

UNICEF 
UNISDR 
USAID 
(cid:61)C(cid:40) 
(cid:61)IP 
W(cid:40)SH 
WE(cid:43)C 
WFH 
WFP 
WHA 
WHO 
WSP 

380

Index

381

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

A 
acute malnutrition see malnutrition
accommodation  (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)9, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)7(cid:27)
accountability 
ii, iii, (cid:27), (cid:28), (cid:29), 7, (cid:31), 1(cid:23), 1(cid:25), 
1(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)7, 7(cid:23), 7(cid:27), 7(cid:28), 7(cid:29), 77, 91, 1(cid:28)9, 
1(cid:31)7, 1(cid:31)(cid:31), 19(cid:25), 19(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:29)7, (cid:26)77, (cid:26)7(cid:31), (cid:26)79
administrative of(cid:196)ces  (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29)
aid agencies see humanitarian agencies
AIDS see HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S
aid worker  7, (cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:29)1, (cid:29)(cid:26), 71, 
7(cid:25), 7(cid:26), 7(cid:29), (cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)9(cid:27)
anthropometric survey  1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:26)
arti(cid:196)cial feeding see feeding
assistance 
iii, vi, (cid:27), (cid:29), 11, 1(cid:25), 1(cid:27), 1(cid:28), 1(cid:29), 
(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)7, (cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)9, (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:27)1, (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:28)7, 
(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:29)7, (cid:29)(cid:31), 7(cid:23), 7(cid:26), 7(cid:28), 7(cid:31), (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:29), 
9(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)9, 1(cid:28)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 17(cid:28), 17(cid:29), 179, 
197, 19(cid:31), 199, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)77, (cid:25)79, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:25)91, 
(cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:25)99, (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:29)1, (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:29)9, (cid:26)7(cid:23), (cid:26)71, (cid:26)7(cid:25), (cid:26)7(cid:26), 
(cid:26)7(cid:28), (cid:26)7(cid:31)
assessment see initial assessment, needs 
assessment, risk assessment

 see also non-food items (NFIs)
 see also thermal comfort

B 
bathing see washing
bedding  11(cid:25), 11(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)1, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25)
 
 
beriberi  1(cid:28)(cid:29), 17(cid:26), 1(cid:31)1
best practice  (cid:27), 17(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26)
biological weapons  (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:25)
birth attendants  1(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29)
 
boys  1(cid:28), (cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:29)1, (cid:29)(cid:29), 7(cid:28), 1(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, 
(cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29)
 
breastfeeding  1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 
1(cid:29)(cid:28), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 1(cid:29)9, 171, 17(cid:25), 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 
(cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25)7, (cid:25)(cid:25)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27)

 see also children

 see also women

382

 see also milk
 see also supplementary feeding

breastmilk  1(cid:28)9, 1(cid:29)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)19, (cid:26)77
 
 
burial  (cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:28)7, 119, 1(cid:25)(cid:23), 191, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23)
 

 culturally appropriate burials  (cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28)

 see also food transfers

iv, v, vi, 11, 1(cid:25), 1(cid:27), 1(cid:28), 1(cid:29), 17, (cid:26)1, 

 see also settlement
 see also shelter

C 
camps  (cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)7, (cid:29)(cid:26), 11(cid:27), 17(cid:31), 19(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:26)19
 
 
caregivers  1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 17(cid:25), 
1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 19(cid:31), (cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25)
case fatality rates  (cid:26)17, (cid:26)19, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:27)7, (cid:26)77
cash and voucher transfers  11, 9(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 
1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 1(cid:28)(cid:26), 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 17(cid:23), 
17(cid:28), 17(cid:29), 17(cid:31), 199, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27)
 
cash for work  (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26)
children 
(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:28)7, (cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:29), 7(cid:26), 7(cid:29), 
91, 9(cid:25), 9(cid:27), 9(cid:29), 99, 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 11(cid:23), 
11(cid:26), 119, 1(cid:25)(cid:28), 1(cid:26)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)7, 
1(cid:28)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)9, 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 
1(cid:29)(cid:26), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)7, 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:23), 171, 17(cid:25), 17(cid:27), 17(cid:31), 
179, 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 1(cid:31)(cid:29), 19(cid:28), 19(cid:29), 19(cid:31), 
(cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:25)9, (cid:25)(cid:26)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)7(cid:25), (cid:25)7(cid:26), (cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)7(cid:31), (cid:25)79, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:31)9, 
(cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:27), 
(cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:25)9, 
(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:27)9, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:28)7, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:31), 
(cid:26)(cid:28)9, (cid:26)(cid:29)1, (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:26)77, (cid:26)79, (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 
 
cholera  (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 1(cid:25)9, 1(cid:26)1, 1(cid:26)(cid:25), 
1(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:26)1(cid:29), (cid:26)17, (cid:26)1(cid:31), (cid:26)19, 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:27)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)7(cid:31)
chronic diseases  1(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:26)1(cid:28)
chronic malnutrition see malnutrition
civil society organisations  1(cid:23), (cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:28)9, (cid:31)(cid:28), 
1(cid:27)7, 19(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29)
climate change  v, 1(cid:23), 11, 1(cid:25), 1(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:31), 
1(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:28), 
(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
clinicians  (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:27)7, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26)

 see also infants
 see also vulnerable people

 see also disease
 see also non-communicable disease

 see also non-food items (NFIs)
 see also thermal comfort
 protective clothing  11(cid:29), 11(cid:31), 1(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)1(cid:23)

clothing  (cid:25)(cid:25), 9(cid:31), 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 11(cid:25), 11(cid:26), 11(cid:29), 11(cid:31), 
1(cid:25)(cid:23), 1(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:25)9, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)1, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:31)
 
 
 
CMR see crude mortality rate
Code of Conduct  1, (cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)7, (cid:28)(cid:29), 7(cid:25), 
(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:29)9, (cid:26)7(cid:23)
communicable disease  (cid:27)(cid:25), 11(cid:28), 1(cid:25)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 
1(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:29)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)9, (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:25)99, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)1(cid:29), 
(cid:26)19, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)9, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25)
 
 
community mapping  101
community mobilisation  91, 9(cid:25), 9(cid:26), 1(cid:23)1, 
111, 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 17(cid:23)
Community Health Workers  1(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)1, 
(cid:26)1(cid:29), (cid:26)77
con(cid:197)ict 
ii, v, (cid:27), (cid:29), 7, 9, 1(cid:23), 1(cid:25), 1(cid:26), 1(cid:28), 1(cid:29), 
(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)9, (cid:27)(cid:23), 
(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:29)7, 7(cid:28), 7(cid:29), 
(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:26), 17(cid:28), 17(cid:31), 1(cid:31)9, 191, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)79, 
(cid:25)91, (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)11, (cid:26)17, (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)1, 
(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:28)7, (cid:26)(cid:28)9, (cid:26)(cid:29)1, (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:29)9, 
(cid:26)7(cid:27), (cid:26)7(cid:29)
construction materials  1(cid:23)9, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)1
cooking  (cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:31)(cid:26), 97, 9(cid:31), 1(cid:23)(cid:23), 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 
11(cid:26), 1(cid:26)1, 17(cid:31), 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 19(cid:27), 197, 
19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)9, 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)1, (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)7(cid:26), (cid:25)7(cid:27), (cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25)
 
 
 
coordination  v, vi, (cid:28), 7, 1(cid:23), 11, 1(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)1, 
(cid:26)9, (cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:28)9, (cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:29)9, 71, 7(cid:27), 
(cid:31)(cid:28), 9(cid:26), 9(cid:28), 11(cid:31), 119, 1(cid:25)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 
1(cid:28)9, 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)(cid:31), 1(cid:31)9, 19(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)7(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:23), 
(cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:25)9(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)7, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:26)7(cid:27), (cid:26)7(cid:28), (cid:26)79
coping strategies  1(cid:28), 1(cid:29), (cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)9, 
1(cid:28)(cid:26), 17(cid:28), 17(cid:29), 177, (cid:25)1(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)9(cid:28)

 see also fuel
 see also stoves
 see also utensils

I n d e x

ii, iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), (cid:29), 7, (cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25), 

 see also Humanitarian Charter
 see also minimum standards
 see also Protection Principles

Core Standards 
(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:27)9, (cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:28)1, (cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:31)(cid:23), 
(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:31)9, 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:27)
 
 
 
crude mortality rate (cid:15)CMR(cid:16)  (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:23), (cid:26)11, 
(cid:26)(cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:26)77
 
 see also under-(cid:28) mortality rate (cid:15)(cid:60)(cid:28)MR(cid:16)
cultural practices  17, 9(cid:29), 9(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)9, 
(cid:25)7(cid:25), (cid:25)7(cid:26)

D 
data  (cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:28)9, (cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:29)1, (cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:29)(cid:31), 
7(cid:23), 71, (cid:31)7, 9(cid:31), 1(cid:23)9, 11(cid:26), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)9, 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)7(cid:31), 
(cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:25)9(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)7, (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:26), 
(cid:26)1(cid:31), (cid:26)19, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:28)1, (cid:26)77
 
 
 
 

 see also evaluation
 see also monitoring
 con(cid:196)dentiality of data  (cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)7
 disaggregated  (cid:29)1, (cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:31)7, 
1(cid:23)9, 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)7(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)7
decision-making  1(cid:27), 1(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:28)9, 7(cid:23), 
(cid:31)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:23), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29)
dengue  111, 11(cid:28), 1(cid:26)1, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:31), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)
diagnosis  11, 11(cid:26), 11(cid:27), 11(cid:28), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 17(cid:26), 17(cid:27), 
(cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)99, (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)1(cid:31), (cid:26)19, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)7, 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:27)
 
diarrhoea  (cid:31)(cid:27), 9(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:23), 1(cid:23)1, 1(cid:23)(cid:25), 11(cid:23), 111, 
11(cid:27), 11(cid:28), 1(cid:26)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:26), 17(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:25)19, 
(cid:25)99, (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27)1, 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27)
diphtheria  (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:26)7(cid:31)
 
disabled people see persons with 
disabilities
disaster-affected people 
(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:29), 9(cid:31), 111, 11(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 17(cid:29), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:25)7(cid:26), (cid:25)9(cid:27)
disaster-affected population  (cid:28), 7, 9, 11, 
(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:29)1, (cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:29)7, 71, 7(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:26), 
(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:31)(cid:31), 9(cid:27), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 11(cid:29), 1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 

ii, (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:29), 71, 

 see also disease

 see also DPT

383

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

ii, iii, v, vi, 1, (cid:27), (cid:28), (cid:29), 7, 9, 1(cid:23), 11, 

1(cid:29)(cid:29), 17(cid:29), 17(cid:31), 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 19(cid:25), 19(cid:26), 19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:25)11, (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:26), 
(cid:25)7(cid:27), (cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)7(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:25)91, (cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:25)97, (cid:25)9(cid:31), 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:31)
disaster preparedness  (cid:28), 1(cid:23), (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:29)(cid:31), 
7(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:28)9, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31)
disaster response  (cid:27), 1(cid:27), 17, (cid:25)(cid:23), 7(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:28), 
(cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)9, 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:27)9, 179, (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:25)9(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)17, (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:29)9, 
(cid:26)7(cid:23), (cid:26)71, (cid:26)7(cid:25), (cid:26)7(cid:26), (cid:26)7(cid:27), (cid:26)7(cid:28), (cid:26)7(cid:29)
disasters 
1(cid:25), 1(cid:27), 1(cid:28), 1(cid:29), 17, (cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)9, 
(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)1, (cid:26)7, (cid:26)9, (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:28), 
(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:28)7, (cid:28)9, (cid:29)1, (cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:29)7, (cid:29)(cid:31), 7(cid:25), 
7(cid:26), 7(cid:27), 7(cid:28), 7(cid:29), 77, 7(cid:31), (cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:28), 
(cid:31)(cid:29), 91, 9(cid:25), 9(cid:31), 1(cid:23)(cid:25), 1(cid:23)(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:23)9, 
11(cid:23), 111, 117, 11(cid:31), 119, 1(cid:25)(cid:23), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)(cid:28), 1(cid:26)(cid:23), 
1(cid:26)(cid:29), 1(cid:26)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:27)9, 1(cid:28)1, 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 
1(cid:28)(cid:26), 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)9, 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:28), 
171, 17(cid:29), 177, 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 19(cid:26), 19(cid:27), 19(cid:28), 
19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23)7, 
(cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:27), (cid:25)1(cid:28), (cid:25)1(cid:29), (cid:25)17, (cid:25)(cid:25)7, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)9, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:31), (cid:25)79, 
(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:25)9(cid:27), 
(cid:25)9(cid:28), (cid:25)9(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:31), (cid:25)99, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)1(cid:23), (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)17, (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), 
(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:27)7, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:27)9, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)1, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29), 
(cid:26)(cid:28)7, (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:29)9, (cid:26)7(cid:23), (cid:26)71, 
(cid:26)7(cid:25), (cid:26)7(cid:26), (cid:26)7(cid:27), (cid:26)7(cid:28), (cid:26)7(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 see also initial assessment
 
 
 see also urban disasters
disease  (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:31)(cid:31), 91, 
9(cid:31), 1(cid:23)(cid:23), 1(cid:23)1, 1(cid:23)(cid:28), 111, 11(cid:25), 11(cid:26), 11(cid:27), 11(cid:28), 
117, 1(cid:25)(cid:23), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)7, 1(cid:26)1, 1(cid:26)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)(cid:29), 
1(cid:27)9, 1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:26), 17(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 
19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)9, (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:25)9(cid:28), 
(cid:25)9(cid:29), (cid:25)99, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:25), 
(cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)1(cid:29), (cid:26)17, (cid:26)1(cid:31), (cid:26)19, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:26)7, (cid:26)(cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:27)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28), 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:27)7, (cid:26)(cid:27)9, (cid:26)(cid:28)1, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:26)77, (cid:26)79
 
 
 
 
 
 

 see also communicable disease
 see also chronic disease
 see also excreta-related disease
 see also micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies
 see also vector-borne disease
 see also water-borne disease

384

 see also diphtheria
 see also pertussis
 see also tetanus

displaced populations  11(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)79, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)9, 
(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26)
disposal of dead bodies  11(cid:31), 1(cid:26)(cid:29)
distribution systems  179, 19(cid:26)
(cid:186)do no harm(cid:187) (cid:15)principle(cid:16)  17(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28)
(cid:43)PT (cid:15)diphtheria, pertussis and 
tetanus(cid:16)  (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)7(cid:31)
 
 
 
drainage  (cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:31), 1(cid:23)1, 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 
111, 11(cid:27), 11(cid:28), 117, 1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)(cid:26), 1(cid:25)7, 1(cid:25)(cid:31), 
1(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)1, (cid:25)(cid:29)7, (cid:26)1(cid:26)
 
 
 
 
drought  99, 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 17(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:26)
drugs  1(cid:28), 7(cid:26), 11(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31)
 
 
 

 see also groundwater
 see also pollution
 see also stormwater
 see also surface water

 see also essential medicines
 see also medical supplies
 drug management  (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26)

E 
early warning systems  (cid:31)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)17
earth(cid:88)uakes  1(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:26)1
eating utensils see cooking; utensils
employment  9(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 17(cid:28), 177, 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:23)
environmental impact  7(cid:29), 97, 17(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28)
EPI see Expanded Programme on 
Immunization
erosion  (cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)(cid:26), 17(cid:29), 177, (cid:25)11, 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)7
 
essential health services see health 
services
essential medicines  (cid:25)9(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:31), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:26)7, (cid:26)(cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:27)9
 
 

 see also drugs
 see also medical supplies

 erosion of assets  177, (cid:25)11

I n d e x

 see also data
 see also monitoring

evaluation  v, (cid:28), (cid:31), 9, 11, 1(cid:27), (cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:29)9, 
7(cid:23), 7(cid:28), 77, 7(cid:31), (cid:31)(cid:29), 9(cid:25), 1(cid:26)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 17(cid:29), 17(cid:31), 
179, 19(cid:23), 19(cid:25), 19(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:23), (cid:26)19, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23)
 
 
excreta  (cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:31), 9(cid:25), 1(cid:23)1, 1(cid:23)(cid:28), 
1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:23)9, 11(cid:23), 111, 11(cid:27), 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 
1(cid:25)7, 1(cid:26)(cid:25), 1(cid:26)(cid:29), 1(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)1(cid:25)
 
 
 

 see also toilets
 see also waste management
 excreta disposal  (cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:31), 9(cid:25), 
1(cid:23)1, 1(cid:23)(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:23)9, 11(cid:23), 111, 
11(cid:27), 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 1(cid:25)7, 1(cid:26)(cid:29), 1(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)1(cid:25)

 see also disease

excreta-related disease  (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)(cid:28), 
1(cid:23)7, 11(cid:26), 1(cid:26)1
 
Expanded Programme on Immunization 
(cid:15)EPI(cid:16)  (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)7(cid:31)
F 
faeco-oral diseases see diseases
faecal contamination  1(cid:23)(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:29)
feeding  (cid:26)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 11(cid:25), 11(cid:28), 1(cid:25)9, 1(cid:26)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 
1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)9, 
1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:28), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 
17(cid:23), 17(cid:26), 17(cid:27), 17(cid:31), 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 
1(cid:31)(cid:29), 19(cid:29), 197, 19(cid:31), (cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)9, 
(cid:26)7(cid:31), (cid:26)79
 see also supplementary feeding
 
 
 see also undernutrition
(cid:196)eld hospitals  (cid:25)97, (cid:25)99
 see also health centre
 
 see also hospitals
 
 
 see also mobile clinics
(cid:196)rst aid  7(cid:26), 7(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23)
(cid:196)xings see tools
(cid:197)ies  111, 11(cid:25), 11(cid:27), 11(cid:28), 117, 119, 1(cid:26)1
(cid:197)ooding  117, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)(cid:31), 19(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)7, (cid:25)9(cid:26)
(cid:197)oods  1(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:23)9, 11(cid:23), 1(cid:25)1, 
1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)9(cid:26)
food 
iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), 7, (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:29)(cid:29), 7(cid:29), 
(cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)9, 9(cid:25), 9(cid:27), 9(cid:28), 9(cid:31), 1(cid:23)(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 11(cid:23), 111, 
11(cid:25), 11(cid:26), 119, 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 1(cid:26)(cid:25), 1(cid:26)(cid:28), 1(cid:26)9, 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)1, 
1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:27)9, 1(cid:28)(cid:23), 
1(cid:28)1, 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 1(cid:28)(cid:26), 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)9, 

 

 

 

1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:28), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)7, 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 
17(cid:23), 17(cid:26), 17(cid:27), 17(cid:28), 17(cid:29), 177, 17(cid:31), 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 
1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 1(cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:31)7, 1(cid:31)(cid:31), 
1(cid:31)9, 19(cid:23), 191, 19(cid:25), 19(cid:26), 19(cid:27), 19(cid:28), 19(cid:29), 
197, 19(cid:31), 199, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)11, (cid:25)1(cid:25), 
(cid:25)1(cid:26), (cid:25)1(cid:27), (cid:25)1(cid:28), (cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)9, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:26), (cid:25)7(cid:27), (cid:25)7(cid:28), 
(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:25)91, (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:29)9, (cid:26)7(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 see also cooking
 see also food transfers
 see also malnutrition
 see also micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies
 see also nutrition
 see also undernutrition
 access to food  1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 179, 1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 
1(cid:31)(cid:27), 19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25)
 food preparation  1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)7, 197, 
19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:28)9, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)7(cid:26), (cid:25)7(cid:27)
 food rations  (cid:26)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:28), 1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 
1(cid:31)(cid:29), 19(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:29)9
 food storage  (cid:31)9, 11(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)9
 genetically modi(cid:196)ed foods  1(cid:31)7

 
iv, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:28)
food aid 
food insecurity  1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)(cid:23), 1(cid:28)1, 
1(cid:28)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 177, 17(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)
food security 
1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:27)9, 
1(cid:28)(cid:23), 1(cid:28)1, 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 1(cid:28)(cid:26), 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)7, 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 
1(cid:29)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:23), 17(cid:26), 17(cid:27), 17(cid:28), 
17(cid:29), 177, 17(cid:31), 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 
1(cid:31)(cid:28), 1(cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:31)7, 1(cid:31)(cid:31), 1(cid:31)9, 19(cid:25), 19(cid:26), 19(cid:28), 197, 
19(cid:31), 199, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)11, (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:27), (cid:25)1(cid:28), (cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)71, 
(cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25)
food security assessments  1(cid:28)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:25)1(cid:27), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26)
food transfers  1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 
1(cid:28)(cid:26), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:27), 17(cid:28), 17(cid:31), 
179, 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 1(cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:31)7, 1(cid:31)(cid:31), 
1(cid:31)9, 19(cid:25), 19(cid:27), 19(cid:28), 19(cid:29), 197, 19(cid:31), 199, 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)1(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), 
(cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:28)
 
 see also cash and voucher transfers
freedom of movement  (cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:31)

iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), 7, 9(cid:27), 1(cid:26)(cid:28), 1(cid:26)9, 

385

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

fuel  (cid:26)(cid:28), 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 17(cid:31), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 19(cid:27), 197, 19(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)7(cid:27), 
(cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29)
 
 see also cooking
 see also stoves
 

G 
gender-based violence  (cid:26)1, (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:29)(cid:26), 
(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)9, 19(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25)
Geneva Conventions  (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:29)1, 
(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:29)
girls  1(cid:28), (cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:29)1, (cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:29), 
7(cid:28), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:29), 9(cid:27), 9(cid:29), 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)7, 11(cid:23), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:26)(cid:23), 
1(cid:27)9, 1(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:25), (cid:25)7(cid:28), 
(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:27)
 
 
 
groundwater  9(cid:31), 1(cid:23)(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 117, 
119, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)(cid:26), 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 1(cid:25)7
 
 
 
 
 

 see also drainage
 see also pollution
 see also stormwater
 see also surface water
 see also water sources

 see also children
 see also gender-based violence
 see also women

 see also soap
 see also washing

H 
hand washing  1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 11(cid:23), 1(cid:25)1, 
1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)9
 
 
healthcare  (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:26), 119, 1(cid:26)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 
1(cid:29)1, (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)11, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:25)97, (cid:25)99, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:27), 
(cid:26)1(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), 
(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:26)7, (cid:26)(cid:26)9
health centre  1(cid:23)(cid:26), 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)9, 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 
1(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:29), (cid:25)97, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26)
 
 
 
 
health education  1(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)97, (cid:26)1(cid:25), 
(cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:31)
health facilities  11(cid:31), 1(cid:25)(cid:28), 1(cid:26)(cid:25), 17(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)91, (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:25)97, (cid:25)99, (cid:26)(cid:23)1, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)17, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, 

 see also (cid:196)eld hospitals
 see also health workers
 see also hospitals
 see also mobile clinics

386

(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:27)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28), 
(cid:26)(cid:27)7, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26)
health impact  (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:25)9(cid:26)
health information system (cid:15)HIS(cid:16)  (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), 
(cid:26)1(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:26)7(cid:31)
health services  (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:26), 7(cid:26), 111, 11(cid:28), 1(cid:27)(cid:29), 
1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 1(cid:29)(cid:28), 1(cid:29)7, 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:23), 171, 
17(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 199, (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:31)9, (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:25)9(cid:29), (cid:25)97, (cid:25)9(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)1, 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)7, (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)1(cid:23), (cid:26)11, 
(cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)1(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:28)1
 

 access to health services  (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)9(cid:25), 
(cid:25)9(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:23)7, (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)1(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26)
 essential health services  (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:26), 7(cid:26), 
11(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 171, 17(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:29)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:31)9, (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:25)9(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)1(cid:23), (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:28), 
(cid:26)1(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:28)1

 

 see also people living with HI(cid:61) (cid:15)PLHI(cid:61)(cid:16)

health workers  1(cid:25)(cid:28), 1(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)1, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:25), 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)1(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)9
hepatitis (cid:15)(cid:40), (cid:41), C(cid:16)  11(cid:31), 1(cid:25)(cid:23), 1(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)
HIS see health information system
HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S  v, 11, 1(cid:25), 1(cid:28), 1(cid:29), 17, (cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:29)7, 
77, (cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:31)(cid:29), 99, 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)9, 1(cid:26)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)9, 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 
1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:23), 171, 17(cid:25), 17(cid:31), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 
19(cid:27), 19(cid:31), (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25)7, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:25)9(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26)7, (cid:26)(cid:27)1, 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27)9, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:26)79, (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 
hospitals  (cid:26)9, 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 117, 1(cid:25)9, 1(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:25)91, 
(cid:25)9(cid:29), (cid:25)97, (cid:25)99, (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), 
(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:27)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)9, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26)
 
 
 
 
host communities  (cid:29)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)1
host families  (cid:29)(cid:26), 11(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)7, 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)79
household waste  117, 119
 
housing see shelter
housing ownership see ownership
human rights  (cid:29), 1(cid:28), (cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:27)(cid:29), 

 see also (cid:196)eld hospitals
 see also health centres
 see also health workers
 see also mobile clinics

 see also waste management

 see also rights

ii, iii, iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), (cid:28), 

(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:29)7, 71, (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)7, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), 
(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:28)1, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:28)7, (cid:26)(cid:28)9, (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:26)79, (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 
humanitarian agencies  (cid:28), (cid:29), 9, 1(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)7, (cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)9, 
(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:27)1, (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:28)9, (cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:29)(cid:25), 
(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:29)9, 71, (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 
1(cid:31)9, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)91, (cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:29), 
(cid:26)(cid:29)9
humanitarian assistance  (cid:29), 11, 1(cid:27), 1(cid:28), 1(cid:29), 
(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)7, (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:27)(cid:25), 
(cid:29)7, 7(cid:26), 7(cid:28), 7(cid:31), (cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 17(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)91, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29), 
(cid:26)(cid:29)1, (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:29)9, (cid:26)7(cid:23), (cid:26)7(cid:25), (cid:26)7(cid:26)
Humanitarian Charter 
(cid:29), 1(cid:28), 19, (cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)7, (cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:28)(cid:25), 
(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:29)7, 7(cid:31), (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)91, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29)
 
 
 
humanitarian crises 
hygiene promotion 
(cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:31)9, 91, 9(cid:25), 9(cid:26), 9(cid:27), 1(cid:23)(cid:23), 1(cid:23)(cid:25), 
1(cid:23)(cid:26), 1(cid:23)(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 11(cid:23), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)(cid:28), 1(cid:26)(cid:28), 19(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 

 see also Core Standards
 see also minimum standards
 see also Protection Principles

iii, (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:28)1
iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), 7, 79, (cid:31)(cid:23), 

 see also water supply, sanitation and 
hygiene promotion

I 
IDP see internally displaced persons
IMAI see Integrated Management of Adult 
Illness
IMCI see Integrated Management of 
Childhood Illnesses
immunisation  11(cid:31), 1(cid:25)(cid:23), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)99, 
(cid:26)1(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)9
 
 see also vaccination
infants  9(cid:25), 9(cid:29), 1(cid:23)7, 11(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 
1(cid:27)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)9, 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)1, 
1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:23), 171, 17(cid:25), 17(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 
1(cid:31)(cid:28), 1(cid:31)(cid:29), 19(cid:29), 19(cid:31), (cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:25), (cid:25)7(cid:28), 
(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)9, (cid:26)7(cid:31), (cid:26)79
 
 
 
infectious diseases see communicable 
diseases

 see also breastfeeding
 see also children
 see also vulnerable people

I n d e x

 see also outpatient

 see also needs assessment
 see also risk assessment

initial assessment  (cid:29)1, (cid:29)(cid:25), 7(cid:28), (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:29), 
1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)(cid:23), 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)7(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:27)
 
 
injury  (cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:27)(cid:28), 7(cid:25), 7(cid:26), 119, (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)(cid:31)9, (cid:25)9(cid:23), 
(cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:25)99, (cid:26)(cid:23)7, (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:27)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26)
inpatient  1(cid:25)9, 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 1(cid:29)9, 17(cid:23), 171, 
17(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)97, (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26)
 
insects  11(cid:25), 11(cid:26), 1(cid:26)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:26)1(cid:25)
Integrated Management of Adult Illness 
(cid:15)IM(cid:40)I(cid:16)  (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)7(cid:31)
Integrated Management of Childhood 
Illnesses (cid:15)IMCI(cid:16)  (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27)9, 
(cid:26)7(cid:31)
integration  1(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:25)7
internally displaced persons (cid:15)I(cid:43)P(cid:16)  (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)1, (cid:27)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:26)7(cid:31)
 
 
international law  (cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)7, 
(cid:26)9, (cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)91, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:28)7, (cid:26)(cid:28)9, 
(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:29)1, (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:29)9, (cid:26)7(cid:27), (cid:26)7(cid:29), (cid:26)77, 
(cid:26)7(cid:31)

 see also host families
 see also vulnerable people

 see also soap
 see also washing

L 
laboratory services  (cid:25)97, (cid:25)99
laboratory testing  (cid:25)99, (cid:26)1(cid:31)
land ownership see ownership
latrines see toilets
laundry  9(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)9
 
 
livelihoods 
1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:23), 1(cid:28)1, 
1(cid:28)(cid:25), 1(cid:28)(cid:26), 1(cid:28)7, 17(cid:28), 17(cid:29), 177, 17(cid:31), 179, 1(cid:31)1, 
1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)9, 199, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)11, (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:27), (cid:25)1(cid:28), (cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)7(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:26)
livestock  v, 1(cid:25), 9(cid:31), 99, 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 1(cid:25)9, 1(cid:26)(cid:28), 
1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 17(cid:31), 199, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)11, 
(cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:27), (cid:25)1(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:26)79
local authorities  (cid:28), (cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)9, (cid:31)(cid:28), 
119, 1(cid:27)7, 19(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)9, (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:26), 

iv, 1(cid:27), 1(cid:29), (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:29)(cid:31), 9(cid:28), 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 

387

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

(cid:25)9(cid:31), (cid:25)99, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)9
long-lasting insecticide-treated nets 
(cid:15)LLINs(cid:16)  (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23)
 see also malaria
 
 
 see also mosquito control

M 
malaria  111, 11(cid:26), 11(cid:27), 11(cid:28), 1(cid:25)7, 1(cid:26)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 
1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)99, (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:27), 
(cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)17, (cid:26)19, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27)9
 

 see also long-lasting insecticide-treated 
nets (LLINs)
 see also mosquito control
 malaria prevention  (cid:26)1(cid:26)

 see also feeding
 see also micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies
 see also nutrition
 see also supplementary feeding
 see also undernutrition

 
 
malnutrition  1(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)7, 
1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)7, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:28), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)7, 
1(cid:29)9, 17(cid:23), 171, 17(cid:25), 17(cid:26), 17(cid:28), 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)1, 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27)
 
 
 
 
 
markets  (cid:29)(cid:31), 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 11(cid:31), 119, 1(cid:26)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 
1(cid:28)(cid:25), 17(cid:28), 177, 1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)9, 19(cid:29), 199, 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)11, (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:28), (cid:25)17, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28)
measles  (cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)9, 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 17(cid:26), 17(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:25)19, 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:28), (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)17, (cid:26)1(cid:31), (cid:26)19, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)
 
 
medical supplies  (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:25)
 
 
medical waste  117, 11(cid:31), 119, 1(cid:25)(cid:23), 1(cid:26)(cid:29), 
1(cid:26)7
 
meningitis  (cid:25)99, (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)17, (cid:26)1(cid:31), (cid:26)19, (cid:26)(cid:27)1, 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)
 
 

 see also drugs
 see also essential medicines

 see also immunisation
 see also vaccination

 see also vaccination
 see also (cid:61)itamin (cid:40)

 see also waste management

 see also women

ii, iii, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), (cid:28), (cid:29), 

 see also malnutrition
 see also supplementary feeding

 see also breastmilk
 see also supplementary feeding

menstruation  9(cid:27), 9(cid:28), 9(cid:29), 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 11(cid:23), 1(cid:25)7, 
128
 
mental health  1(cid:29), 17, (cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:27)7, 7(cid:26), 7(cid:27), 
7(cid:29), 1(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:31)9, (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:29)1
micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies  1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 
1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)7, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:28), 1(cid:29)9, 17(cid:23), 
171, 17(cid:26), 17(cid:27), 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:28), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26)
 
 
milk  1(cid:28)9, 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 1(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)19
 
 
minerals  1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31)
Minimum Initial Service Package 
(cid:15)MISP(cid:16)  (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)79
minimum standards 
7, (cid:31), 9, 1(cid:23), 1(cid:25), 1(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:29), 
(cid:29)7, (cid:29)9, 71, 7(cid:31), 79, (cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:31), 9(cid:31), 1(cid:26)(cid:27), 
1(cid:26)9, 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)(cid:23), 19(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:26)9, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), 
(cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:31)7, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:25)91, (cid:25)9(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:31), 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:29)1
 
 
 
mobile clinics  (cid:25)97, (cid:25)99
 see also (cid:196)eld hospitals
 
 see also health centres
 
 
 see also hospitals
monitoring  v, (cid:28), 11, 1(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)9, (cid:27)(cid:28), 
(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:29)7, (cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:29)9, 7(cid:23), 71, 77, (cid:31)(cid:29), 91, 9(cid:25), 
9(cid:26), 9(cid:27), 9(cid:31), 1(cid:23)(cid:23), 1(cid:23)1, 1(cid:23)(cid:25), 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 
1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)7, 1(cid:28)9, 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)7, 17(cid:25), 17(cid:29), 
17(cid:31), 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)7, 1(cid:31)(cid:31), 1(cid:31)9, 19(cid:25), 19(cid:28), 
19(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)1(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)7(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)7, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:31), 
(cid:26)1(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)7(cid:25), (cid:26)79
 see also data
 
 
 see also evaluation
morbidity data  (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29)
 
 
mortality data  (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)11, (cid:26)(cid:28)1

 see also Core Standards
 see also Humanitarian Charter
 see also Protection Principles

 see also crude mortality rate
 see also under-(cid:28) mortality rate (cid:15)(cid:60)(cid:28)MR(cid:16)

388

 see also crude mortality rate
 see also under-(cid:28) mortality rate (cid:15)(cid:60)(cid:28)MR(cid:16)

 
 
mos(cid:88)uito control  11(cid:28)
 

 see also long-lasting insecticide-treated 
nets (LLINs)
 see also malaria

 

 see also communicable disease
 see also disease

N 
national authorities  (cid:29), (cid:25)1, 11(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), 
(cid:26)7(cid:27)
natural ha(cid:97)ards  (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26)
needs assessment  (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:28), 7(cid:28), (cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), 
(cid:31)9, 1(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)7(cid:23)
 see also initial assessment
 
 
 see also risk assessment
niacin  17(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:31)
non-communicable disease  (cid:25)(cid:31)9, (cid:25)9(cid:23), 
(cid:25)99, (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:26)7, (cid:26)(cid:27)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:28)1, 
(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:26)79
 
 
non-discrimination  (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)7, (cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)91, 
(cid:26)(cid:28)9
non-food items (cid:15)NFIs(cid:16)  1, (cid:25), (cid:27), 7, 9(cid:27), 9(cid:28), 
1(cid:25)(cid:28), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:26)9, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)1, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:26), (cid:25)7(cid:27), 
(cid:25)7(cid:29), (cid:25)7(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)79
 
 
non-refoulement  (cid:25)(cid:26)
nutrition 
iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), 7, 1(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:28), 11(cid:25), 1(cid:26)9, 
1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:27)9, 
1(cid:28)(cid:23), 1(cid:28)1, 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 
1(cid:29)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)7, 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 1(cid:29)9, 171, 17(cid:25), 17(cid:26), 
17(cid:27), 17(cid:28), 177, 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 
1(cid:31)9, 19(cid:26), 19(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25)7, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)7(cid:31), (cid:26)79
 
 
 
 

 see also food
 see also malnutrition
 see also micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies
 see also undernutrition

 see also bedding
 see also clothing

O 
oedema  1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 171, (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25)

I n d e x

 see also vulnerable people

older people  v, 11, 1(cid:25), 1(cid:29), 17, (cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:27)7, 
(cid:28)7, (cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:29)7, 77, (cid:31)(cid:28), 99, 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 
11(cid:25), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 19(cid:25), 19(cid:27), 19(cid:28), 19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:25)9, (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)7(cid:25), (cid:25)7(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:28)7
 
oral rehydration salts (cid:15)ORS(cid:16)  17(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)79
outpatient  1(cid:25)9, 1(cid:26)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)9, 17(cid:23), 171, 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)7
 
ownership  (cid:31), (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:28)7, 7(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)79

 see also inpatient

 see also caregivers

 see also HI(cid:61) and (cid:40)I(cid:43)S

 see also vulnerable people

P 
parents  (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:27)9, 19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:27), 
298
 
pellagra  1(cid:28)(cid:29), 17(cid:26), 1(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31)
people living with HI(cid:61) (cid:15)PLHI(cid:61)(cid:16)  11, 1(cid:29), (cid:29)(cid:27), 
(cid:29)7, 99, 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 171, 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 19(cid:27), 19(cid:31), 
(cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25)7, (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:26)(cid:25)9, (cid:26)79
 
personal hygiene  9(cid:27), 9(cid:28), 9(cid:29), 97, 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 11(cid:26), 
1(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)1
persons with disabilities  v, 11, 1(cid:25), 1(cid:29), 17, 
(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)7, (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:29)(cid:26), 7(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:28), 9(cid:28), 99, 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)7, 
1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:25)7, 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 19(cid:25), 19(cid:27), 19(cid:28), 19(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)7(cid:26), (cid:25)79, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23), 
(cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:28)9, (cid:26)77
 
pertussis  (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28), 
(cid:26)7(cid:31)
 
planning  (cid:28), 1(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:28)9, (cid:29)(cid:29), 7(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:28), 9(cid:25), 
9(cid:26), 9(cid:28), 119, 1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:26), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)7, 
1(cid:29)(cid:25), 17(cid:31), 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)7, 19(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:25)7, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)71, (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)71, (cid:26)7(cid:27)
play areas  (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26)
pneumonia  (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27)
point-of-use water treatment 
(cid:15)Po(cid:60)WT(cid:16)  1(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:26)79
 
pollution  1(cid:27), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 117, 11(cid:31), 1(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:25)7(cid:28)
 
 

 see also groundwater
 see also stormwater

 see also water supply

 see also DPT

389

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 see also surface water
 see also toilets
 see also water sources

 see also vulnerable people
 see also women
 delivery kits  (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29)

 
 
 
pregnant women  1(cid:23)7, 11(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:23)
 
 
 
principle of humanity  (cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)1, (cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)91
privacy  9(cid:26), 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:28)9, 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)97, (cid:25)99
 see also shelter
 
 
 see also women
programme design  (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)9, 1(cid:26)7, 
1(cid:29)(cid:29), 17(cid:23), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:28)
property ownership see ownership
Protection Principles 
(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:25)7, (cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:31)(cid:25), 
(cid:31)(cid:28), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 11(cid:23), 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:28)(cid:26), 19(cid:27), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:27)
 
 
 
psychosocial support  1(cid:25), 17, (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:27)1, 
(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:27)7, 71, 7(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)9, 17(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:29)1
public health  (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:31)9, 91, 1(cid:23)1, 1(cid:23)(cid:25), 
117, 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:26)(cid:27), 1(cid:26)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 
1(cid:28)7, 1(cid:29)(cid:28), 17(cid:26), 17(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 19(cid:23), (cid:25)19, 
(cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:25)97, (cid:25)9(cid:31), 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)1(cid:23), (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:27)9, 
(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)1

 see also Core Standards
 see also Humanitarian Charter
 see also minimum standards

iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:29), 7, (cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28), 

Q 
(cid:88)uality and accountability  (cid:27), (cid:28), 7, (cid:31), 1(cid:25), 
1(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:26), 7(cid:27), (cid:26)79
(cid:88)uarantine areas  (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29)

R 
rations see food, food rations
reconstruction  1(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:28), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:29)1
recovery period  1(cid:28)(cid:25), 171
refugees  vi, 1(cid:28), (cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:27)(cid:29), 7(cid:29), 
(cid:31)(cid:27), 11(cid:25), 1(cid:26)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:26)19, 
(cid:26)(cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:27)9, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)1, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29), 

390

(cid:26)(cid:29)1, (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:29)9, (cid:26)79, (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
remuneration  (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)1, 
(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:31)
reproductive health  1(cid:29)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 171, (cid:25)(cid:31)9, 
(cid:25)9(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:23)7, (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:27)9, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), 
(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)79
ribo(cid:197)avin de(cid:196)ciency  1(cid:31)1
ii, (cid:27), (cid:29), 7, 1(cid:26), 1(cid:27), 1(cid:28), 1(cid:29), 17, (cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)1, 
rights 
(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)7, 
(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)9, (cid:27)1, (cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:28)7, (cid:28)(cid:31), 
(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:29)7, 71, 7(cid:29), (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:31)7, 1(cid:23)9, 11(cid:23), 
11(cid:28), 1(cid:26)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)9, 17(cid:29), 19(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:25)91, (cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:25)9(cid:28), (cid:25)97, (cid:25)99, 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)7, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:28)1, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:29), 
(cid:26)(cid:28)7, (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:28)9, (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:26)7(cid:23), (cid:26)7(cid:26), 
(cid:26)77, (cid:26)7(cid:31), (cid:26)79, (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 
 
  abuse of rights  (cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:28)9
  violations of rights  (cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:31)
risk assessment  1(cid:23)1, 1(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)1(cid:29), (cid:26)17, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:23), 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26)
 
 
rodents  11(cid:25), 11(cid:26), 11(cid:27), 117, 119, 1(cid:31)(cid:31)

 see also initial assessment
 see also needs assessment

 see also human rights
 see also non-discrimination

 see also pollution
 see also water supply

S 
safe drinking water  (cid:31)(cid:27), 97, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26)
 
 
iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), 7, 1(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:28)9, 79, (cid:31)(cid:23), 
sanitation 
(cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:31)(cid:31), 91, 9(cid:31), 99, 1(cid:23)(cid:25), 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 
1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:23)9, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)(cid:28), 1(cid:25)7, 1(cid:26)1, 
1(cid:26)(cid:25), 1(cid:26)(cid:27), 1(cid:26)(cid:28), 1(cid:26)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 
 

 see also water supply
 see also water supply, sanitation and 
hygiene promotion

schools  (cid:26)9, (cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:28)7, 9(cid:26), 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)9, 
1(cid:26)(cid:23), 179, 19(cid:27), 19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)(cid:29)1, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)79, (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), 
(cid:26)(cid:28)1
SCM see supply chain management
scurvy  1(cid:28)(cid:29), 17(cid:26), 1(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31)
security 
(cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)9, (cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:29)7, 71, 

iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), (cid:29), 7, (cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27), 

7(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)9, 9(cid:27), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:26)(cid:28), 1(cid:26)9, 1(cid:27)(cid:23), 
1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:27)9, 1(cid:28)(cid:23), 
1(cid:28)1, 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 1(cid:28)(cid:26), 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)7, 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 1(cid:29)1, 
1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:23), 17(cid:26), 17(cid:27), 17(cid:28), 17(cid:29), 
177, 17(cid:31), 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)1, 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 
1(cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:31)7, 1(cid:31)(cid:31), 1(cid:31)9, 19(cid:23), 191, 19(cid:25), 19(cid:26), 
19(cid:28), 19(cid:29), 197, 19(cid:31), 199, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)11, (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:27), (cid:25)1(cid:28), (cid:25)1(cid:29), 
(cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)9, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)7(cid:31), 
(cid:25)79, (cid:25)91, (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:23), 
(cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:26)7(cid:25), (cid:26)7(cid:27), (cid:26)7(cid:28), (cid:26)7(cid:29)
seeds  1(cid:27)1, 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:28)(cid:23), 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 199, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23)7, 
(cid:25)11, (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:29), (cid:25)17, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)7
 
settlement  1, (cid:25), (cid:27), 7, (cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:23)1, 11(cid:25), 
11(cid:26), 11(cid:27), 11(cid:28), 11(cid:31), 119, 1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)9, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)1, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)7, 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)77, (cid:25)7(cid:31), (cid:25)79, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 
 

 see also shelter
 communal settlement  (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28)
 temporary settlement  (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28)

 see also food, genetically modi(cid:196)ed food

 

severe malnutrition see malnutrition
sexual abuse  71, 19(cid:28)
sexual exploitation  (cid:27)(cid:23), 7(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)9, 19(cid:28), 
19(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)9(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)7
shelter  1, (cid:25), (cid:27), 7, 1(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:28)9, (cid:31)(cid:26), 9(cid:28), 
111, 11(cid:25), 11(cid:26), 11(cid:27), 1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:26), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 1(cid:29)1, 
19(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25)9, (cid:25)(cid:26)9, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:27)1, 
(cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)9, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)1, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:29), 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)7(cid:29), (cid:25)77, (cid:25)7(cid:31), 
(cid:25)79, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)1, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)91, 
(cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:26)11, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:23)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 see also camps
 see also environmental impact
 see also ownership
 see also privacy
 see also risk assessment
 see also settlement
 see also thermal comfort
 shelter materials  (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:28)9, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23)

I n d e x

 

 transitional shelter  (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)9
 ventilation  (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:29)1, (cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23)

 see also hand washing
 see also laundry
 see also washing

 see also drainage
 see also groundwater
 see also pollution
 see also surface water

 
soap  (cid:31)9, 9(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 11(cid:23), 1(cid:25)(cid:23)
 
 
 
social networks  (cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:29)7, 7(cid:26), 17(cid:29), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:25)17, (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:28)
solid waste management see waste 
management
special needs see vulnerable people
stormwater  1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:25)(cid:25)
 
 
 
 
stoves  177, 19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)7, (cid:25)(cid:29)1, (cid:25)7(cid:27), 
(cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25)
 
 
 
subsistence needs  (cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:26)7
supplementary feeding  1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:28), 1(cid:29)(cid:29), 
1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:23), 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:25)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)1(cid:26)
 
 
 
 
supply chain management (cid:15)SCM(cid:16)  1(cid:27)(cid:25), 
179, 1(cid:31)(cid:31), 1(cid:31)9, 19(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:26)79
surface water  1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)7, 11(cid:28), 117, 1(cid:25)1, 
1(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)1
 
 
 
 

 see also breastfeeding
 see also feeding
 see also malnutrition
 see also micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies

 see also drainage
 see also groundwater
 see also pollution
 see also stormwater

 see also cooking
 see also fuel
 see also utensils

T 
targeting  17, (cid:29)7, (cid:29)9, 7(cid:31), (cid:31)(cid:29), 9(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 
1(cid:28)(cid:23), 1(cid:28)1, 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 17(cid:28), 17(cid:31), 19(cid:25), 19(cid:26), 199, 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:25)7, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:23)9
tetanus  11(cid:31), 1(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26), 
(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:26)7(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 

 see also DPT

391

H u m a n i t a r i a n   C h a r t e r   a n d   M i n i m u m   S t a n d a r d s   i n   H u m a n i t a r i a n   R e s p o n s e

 see also bedding
 see also clothing

thermal comfort  (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:25)
 
 
thiamine  17(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31)
toilets  (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)9, 1(cid:23)(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:23)9, 
11(cid:23), 11(cid:28), 1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 1(cid:25)7, 1(cid:25)(cid:31), 1(cid:25)9, 1(cid:26)(cid:23), 
1(cid:26)(cid:25), 19(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25)
 
 see also pollution
 
 see also water supply
tools  (cid:28), (cid:31), 1(cid:23), 11, 1(cid:26), (cid:27)(cid:27), (cid:27)(cid:28), (cid:28)7, 7(cid:23), 7(cid:28), 
1(cid:23)7, 11(cid:23), 11(cid:26), 1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:25), 1(cid:28)(cid:26), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 
1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:31)1, 199, (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:23)7, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)11, (cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23), 
(cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:29), (cid:25)77, 
(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23)
 
training  vi, 1(cid:26), 71, 7(cid:31), (cid:31)(cid:28), 9(cid:25), 9(cid:26), 9(cid:27), 1(cid:23)(cid:23), 
1(cid:23)(cid:25), 11(cid:29), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)9, 17(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:27), 19(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:28), 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:25)7(cid:29), 
(cid:25)77, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:25)9(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:23)1, (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:28)
 transfers see cash and voucher transfers; 
food transfers
triage  (cid:25)97, (cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)1, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25), 
(cid:26)7(cid:31)
tuberculosis  1(cid:29), (cid:31)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)9, 1(cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:28), 
(cid:26)1(cid:27), (cid:26)1(cid:28), (cid:26)(cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:27)9, (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
typhoid  1(cid:26)1, (cid:26)17, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:28)

 see also non-food items (NFIs)

 see also crude mortality rate (CMR)

U 
under-(cid:28) mortality rate (cid:15)(cid:60)(cid:28)MR(cid:16)  (cid:25)9(cid:25), (cid:26)1(cid:23), 
(cid:26)11, (cid:26)(cid:26)9, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
 
undernutrition  1(cid:27)(cid:27), 1(cid:27)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)(cid:29), 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 
1(cid:28)(cid:25), 1(cid:28)(cid:27), 1(cid:28)(cid:28), 1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:28)7, 1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:29)(cid:27), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 
17(cid:23), (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)1(cid:31), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:26)1, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:27)
 
 
 
 
 
urban disasters  1(cid:23)(cid:29), 11(cid:23)
 
utensils  1(cid:23)(cid:27), 197, 19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)7(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25)
 
 

 see also feeding
 see also malnutrition
 see also micronutrient de(cid:196)ciencies
 see also nutrition
 see also supplementary feeding

 see also cooking
 see also stoves

 see also disasters

 see also immunisation

 see also disease
 see also water-borne disease

V 
vaccination  17(cid:27), (cid:25)19, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)19, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:25)1, 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:25)
 
vector-borne disease  111, 11(cid:25), 11(cid:26), 11(cid:27), 
1(cid:25)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:31), (cid:26)1(cid:25)
 
 
(cid:61)itamin (cid:40)  1(cid:28)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)1, 1(cid:29)(cid:25), 1(cid:29)(cid:26), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:26), 
17(cid:27), 1(cid:31)1, (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:25)1
(cid:61)itamin C  17(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:31)
(cid:61)itamin (cid:43)  1(cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:31)
vouchers see cash and voucher transfers
vulnerable people  11, (cid:26)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:29), (cid:26)9, (cid:28)(cid:27), (cid:28)(cid:28), 
(cid:29)1, (cid:29)(cid:28), (cid:29)7, (cid:31)7, 9(cid:23), 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:26)7, 1(cid:27)9, 
1(cid:29)(cid:29), 1(cid:29)(cid:31), 17(cid:28), 17(cid:31), 1(cid:31)(cid:26), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 19(cid:27), 197, 
(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)1, (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)11, (cid:25)1(cid:25), (cid:25)1(cid:28), (cid:25)19, (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), 
(cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:25)7(cid:23), (cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)77, (cid:25)79, (cid:25)9(cid:28), 
(cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:23)7, (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)1(cid:23)
 see also children
 
 see also older people
 
 
 see also people living with HI(cid:61) (cid:15)PLHI(cid:61)(cid:16)
 see also persons with disabilities
 
 
 see also women
vulnerability and capacity analysis  7(cid:28), (cid:31)(cid:29), 
1(cid:27)9, (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:31), (cid:25)9(cid:27), (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)

W 
WASH see water supply, sanitation and 
hygiene promotion
wars see con(cid:197)ict
washing  9(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 11(cid:23), 11(cid:26), 
1(cid:25)(cid:23), 1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)9, 19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:23)
 
 
 
waste management  (cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:31), 1(cid:23)1, 
111, 11(cid:27), 117, 119, 1(cid:25)(cid:23), 1(cid:25)7, 1(cid:26)7, 1(cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:25)97, 
(cid:26)1(cid:26)
water-borne diseases  11(cid:26)
 
 

 see also hand washing
 see also laundry
 see also soap

 see also disease
 see also vector-borne disease

392

I n d e x

 see also pollution
 see also safe drinking water
 see also water supply

water collection points  1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)(cid:28)
 
 
 
water safety plan (cid:15)WSP(cid:16)  1(cid:23)(cid:23), 1(cid:23)1, 1(cid:26)(cid:28), 
(cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
water sources  97, 9(cid:31), 99, 1(cid:23)(cid:23), 1(cid:23)(cid:25), 1(cid:23)(cid:28), 
1(cid:23)(cid:29), 11(cid:23), 11(cid:26), 11(cid:27), 1(cid:25)(cid:25), 1(cid:25)(cid:28), 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 1(cid:26)(cid:28), 191, 
(cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23)
 
 
water supply 
iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), 7, 79, (cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), 
(cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:28), (cid:31)(cid:31), 97, 99, 1(cid:23)(cid:23), 1(cid:23)1, 1(cid:23)(cid:25), 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 
1(cid:23)(cid:28), 1(cid:23)(cid:29), 1(cid:23)7, 111, 1(cid:25)1, 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)(cid:28), 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 1(cid:25)(cid:31), 
1(cid:26)(cid:28), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:27)7, (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:29)9, (cid:26)1(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:23), 
(cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:31)7, (cid:26)9(cid:23), (cid:26)91, (cid:26)9(cid:25), (cid:26)9(cid:26), (cid:26)9(cid:27)
 

 see also pollution
 see also water supply

 see also point-of-use water treatment 
(PoUWT)
 see also safe drinking water
 see also water collection points
 see also water supply, sanitation and 
hygiene promotion

 
 
 

iv, 1, (cid:25), (cid:27), 7, 79, (cid:31)(cid:23), 

water supply, sanitation and hygiene 
promotion (cid:15)W(cid:40)SH(cid:16) 
(cid:31)1, (cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:31)(cid:26), (cid:31)(cid:27), (cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:31)7, (cid:31)(cid:31), (cid:31)9, 91, 9(cid:25), 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 
1(cid:23)(cid:31), 11(cid:23), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)(cid:29), 1(cid:26)(cid:25), 1(cid:26)(cid:27), 1(cid:26)(cid:28), 1(cid:27)(cid:31), 
1(cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:23)
women  11, 1(cid:28), 1(cid:29), (cid:25)1, (cid:26)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:28), (cid:27)(cid:23), (cid:28)(cid:26), (cid:28)7, 
(cid:29)1, (cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:29)(cid:27), (cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:29)7, 71, 7(cid:26), 7(cid:28), 7(cid:29), (cid:31)(cid:27), 91, 
9(cid:26), 9(cid:27), 9(cid:29), 99, 1(cid:23)(cid:26), 1(cid:23)(cid:27), 1(cid:23)7, 1(cid:23)(cid:31), 1(cid:23)9, 
11(cid:23), 11(cid:26), 1(cid:25)(cid:27), 1(cid:25)7, 1(cid:27)7, 1(cid:28)1, 1(cid:28)(cid:26), 1(cid:28)(cid:31), 1(cid:29)(cid:23), 
1(cid:29)1, 179, 1(cid:31)(cid:23), 1(cid:31)(cid:25), 1(cid:31)(cid:28), 19(cid:25), 19(cid:26), 19(cid:28), 
19(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:26), (cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:31), (cid:25)(cid:23)9, (cid:25)1(cid:23), (cid:25)1(cid:25), 
(cid:25)1(cid:27), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:25)(cid:25)7, (cid:25)(cid:26)7, (cid:25)(cid:28)(cid:28), (cid:25)(cid:29)(cid:26), 
(cid:25)71, (cid:25)7(cid:25), (cid:25)7(cid:26), (cid:25)7(cid:28), (cid:25)79, (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:23), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:25), (cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:27), 
(cid:25)(cid:31)(cid:29), (cid:25)9(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:23)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:23)9, (cid:26)1(cid:26), (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:25)7, (cid:26)(cid:25)(cid:31), 
(cid:26)(cid:25)9, (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:26)(cid:31), (cid:26)(cid:27)1, (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:25), (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:29), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:23), (cid:26)(cid:28)(cid:31), 
(cid:26)(cid:29)(cid:26), (cid:26)7(cid:23), (cid:26)77
 
 
 
 
 

 see also gender-based violence
 see also pregnant women
 see also privacy
 see also vulnerable people
 participation of women  (cid:29)(cid:29), (cid:31)(cid:27), 19(cid:25)

Y 
young children see children

393

Visit the Sphere Project website
www.sphereproject.org

To order the Sphere Handbook please go to 

www.practicalactionpublishing.org /sphere

Humanitarian Charter and Minimum 
Standards in Humanitarian Response: 
The right to life with dignity
The Sphere Project is an initiative to determine and promote 
standards by which the global community responds to the 
plight of people affected by disasters.

With this Handbook, Sphere is working for a world in which the 
right of all people affected by disasters to re-establish their lives 
and livelihoods is recognised and acted upon in ways that respect 
their voice and promote their dignity and security.
This Handbook contains:
»  (cid:40) Humanitarian Charter: legal and moral principles which re(cid:197)ect the 

rights of disaster-affected populations

»  Protection Principles
»  Core Standards and minimum standards in four key life-saving 

humanitarian sectors: Water supply, sanitation and hygiene promotion; 
Food security and nutrition; Shelter, settlement and non-food items; 
Health action. They describe what needs to be achieved in a 
humanitarian response in order for disaster-affected populations 
to survive and recover in stable conditions and with dignity.

The Sphere Handbook enjoys broad ownership by agencies and 
individuals, offering the humanitarian sector a common language for 
working together towards quality and accountability in disaster and 
conﬂict situations. 

The Sphere Handbook has a number of companion standards: the 
CPMS for child protection, INEE for education in emergencies, LEGS for 
livestock responses in emergencies, and MERS for economic recovery. 
Sphere thus extends its scope in response to needs that have emerged 
within the humanitarian sector.

The Sphere Project was initiated in 1997 by a number 
of humanitarian NGOs and the Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Movement.

